ETOD2: Drivers of Wealth Inequality
Summary
Wealth inequality is very high in the United States and has increased over the last 40 years across the western world. Wealth inequality is not only driven by higher earners earning and saving more, but also the return on wealth itself. Following Piketty, recent work has noted that the return on property (real estate) and equities is approximately 7%, exceeding the average growth rate of the economy and of wages. The rich can therefore get richer faster than the poor can catch up. Here we investigate the processes preventing competition from reducing the return of the rich. There are two we mention: scarce assets, such as land, that cannot be replicated; and the competitive barriers erected by businesses to protect their competitive advantage against competition.
Land is that part of property that remains when a building is demolished, The land value can be estimated as the value of a property in excess of the rebuild cost of the building standing on it. Since land (in a particular place, and in general) is inherently fixed in supply, as the demand for land increases, its price goes up, and supply cannot adjust. Since land lasts forever and the rent on land increases as wages rise, lower interest rates lead to the value of land (and therefore property, including residential homes) increasing still further, so its out of the reach of everyday people.
Companies are also encouraged by business schools and influential investors to increase the barriers to entry and competitive ‘moats’ so they too can earn permanent surpluses. 
Competition (including public housing), taxation (including land value taxes, taxes on companies, and taxes on wealth) and public or sovereign wealth funds (taking the burden of supporting the old or poor off taxation) are some methods for redistributing wealth. 
Perhaps more fundamentally government should ensure that everyone has wealth; whilst not falling into the trap of promoting policies (like ‘help to buy’) that increase property and other asset values still further.


Definition
There is much concern about wealth inequality. Income inequality describes the distribution of incomes; wealth inequality describes the distribution of private wealth. Private wealth is the stock of assets (such as houses, money, shares and bonds) owned by individuals. In countries with high wealth inequality, a large proportion of assets are owned by a small proportion of the population. (Add data for US here; and data globally too).
Wealth Inequality and Democracy
The Spirit Level argues that inequality of wealth and income leads to worse socioeconomic outcomes. Here we focus on another matter: inequality is potentially threatening to our whole political system of representative liberal democracy. This threat comes both from the bottom (who see no benefit from economic growth) and the top (who can use their wealth to influence and corrupt politics).
At the top, the extreme wealth of some individuals, companies and nation states gives them enormous power. This gives them power not only to influence politics directly through lobbying politicians and paying campaign contributions, but also to influence the life of the society more indirectly, by influencing what the media say, what theories are taught in economics departments, what policies are promoted by think tanks, and generally removing the checks and balances that constitutional government imposes on the wealthy. And thus they further enhancing their power. Once empowered, the term ‘political rent seeking’ describes a process by which these rich and powerful groups can influence the government into cutting taxes and granting them favours. This could even extend to making war to enhance arms sales. Thus, we have a positive feedback loop, where wealth begets favours from government, begetting even more wealth.
From the bottom of the socioeconomic pile, we get other issues. If the state is distorted in favour of the wealthy, then it may be that the poor see little of the benefit of economic growth. They may eventually revolt and see their salvation in some strongman, with echoes of the 1930s. 
Fascism could then be the common feature acceptable both to the poor and rich: to the poor because they feel personal connection to a charismatic individual who promises much and has few of the scruples of liberal democrats; to the rich because fascism is corporatist in character, leading to plenty of side deals with rich and influential actors. 
In Russia, some argue that Yeltsin sold off the state at knock-down prices to a group of now-rich oligarchs, whereas Putin has consolidated the control of this group of oligarchs whilst enriching himself and his cronies and defending it against public revolt and preventing a leader who might wish to redistribute or tax these ill-gotten gains. 
Martin Wolf of the Financial Times has described the United States now as being run by a pluto-populist, combining elements of plutocracy (rule by the rich for the rich) and populism (rule by the mob for the mob, in both the meanings of the word ‘mob’).
To be more precise we might argue that democracy thrives on a large, well off middle class. For example, Switzerland, despite high wealth inequality, has a large well-educated middle class, few individuals of low socio-economic status, and a stable direct democracy.

The Arithmetic of Increasing Wealth Inequality: 
Income inequality causes wealth inequality, but wealth inequality also perpetuates itself. 
First the arithmetic connection between income inequality and wealth inequality: those with high incomes have more income in the first place to save out of, and typically save more as a percentage of their income than low income groups. Alarger portion of a larger original income leads to the rich increasing their wealth much faster than the poor, controlling for other factors.
Land and Shares Go Up Faster Than Wages
But income once saved and invested in assets also grows. Wealth begets more wealth. Houses go up in price, and shares generally rise too over the long term. In the ‘rate of return on everything’ Z analyses data over the long term, finding that
Thomas Piketty described this in his book Capital in the Twenty-first century. Piketty argued that if the rate of return on assets (r) was higher than the growth rate in the economy (g) – in short if r>g –  then inequality of wealth would increase without end. He argued that the growth rate of assets was higher than the growth rate of the economy as a whole in the recent past – and over much of history
But surely underlying every asset is some business or property or other asset making a return. If there are plenty of funds to invest (either from wealthy people or borrowed from banks) then surely the process of competition should reduce that return? If the price of shares in bakers rise, doesn’t that mean that there is capital available for new entrants to build more bakeries?
The Process of Competition
Let’s outline this competitive process in a bit more detail. Imagine that we have shares in a company, say a baker. This baker whilst small, is innovative. Bread is produced by a large number of competitive market. Imagine then someone discovers that by investing in some machine, the cost of making the bread could be much reduced, and that over time, the reduction in production cost pays back the original investment many times. In the short term, the owner of the machine would make a profit, since the price of bread would still be determined by the other producers, but the new producer can make it at a much lower cost.
This profit would however be temporary. Since there is no barrier to someone else buying the same machine, then another baker could easily buy the same machine and therefore also make bread at the new lower cost. Eventually this process of competition would reduce the profit made down to the original level. Our baker would have a competitive advantage.
Back to the Classics
The classical economists Adam Smith and (particularly) David Ricardo thus conceived of a simple model of the economy. There were three classes, the landowners owning land, the capitalist having investible funds and investing those funds in working capital and fixed machinery; and labour which owned nothing but the fruits of their own labour. In this model, ‘capital’ was assumed to compete, whereas land was assumed to be variable and unable to be replicated. This simple model has proved highly relevant to our situation we can apply it to our competitive situation as follows.
When Competition Fails
This process of competition would therefore seem to work well in cases with many similar producers. But there are three circumstances where it does not work. Imagine the new advantage is not replicable by competitors, in this case our baker could earn profits for ever. 
Secondly, imagine the baker can raise prices not because of a new invention but because he is the monopolist locally, nationally or internationally he has a dominant market position, and there simply aren’t other competitors willing or able to compete. This could be the case if for example there were economies of scale in bread production, and therefore the largest producer had inherently lower costs than its rivals. 
Finally, perhaps someone owns the best quality land to produce grain. Land cannot be replicated so as the demand for it increases its price goes up, rather than supply increasing. In modern economic terms we call the supply for land ‘inelastic’: it means, that however high the price someone is willing to pay to buy or rent a piece of land, the supply of that land cannot increase, only the price.
The Crucial Role of Land in Wealth Inequality
Thus we can say that in a competitive market profit is only temporary. But some assets cannot be increased in supply. Land is the clearest example. These assets produce, in economic terms, not temporary profit but permanent rent. As there are more investible funds and interest rates fall, the supply of these goods does not increase but instead the price of them goes up. As wages increases, rents also go up. If interest rates fall, then this means that a given rent will lead to a higher capital value. Thus house prices in the UK have been subject to a double whammy: because land in Southeast England is in limited supply (and because planning is restricted) the rent increases with wages; because interest rates are low, a given rental income, treated as a financial asset, leads to a much higher purchase price than in a higher interest rate environment.
Underneath housing is land and land extracts rent; and the rent extracted goes up with affordability: i.e. with average wages. Matthew Roglie now of Northwestern University (previously a MIT PhD student when he originally published on this matter) pointed out that if you stripped out the increasing rent from housing, then the share of income going to wealth was no longer increasing relative to the share going to wages. Property in short was crucial to inequality.
In essence therefore, the owner of an asset such as land that is inherently limited in supply makes money just by the mere fact of ownership. There is little that such a passive owner of wealth needs to do. The investments in the economy around him, in public services, and the growth in wages benefits him without him taking any action. Of course, the original price of purchase of land reflects these financial privileges, and this leads to ever escalating house prices, until, of course, some government steps in to end the madness, or the financial markets themselves feel the price is too overvalued. At this point, the market may crash.
What Can Be Done About Rent Extraction?
Taxation has an important part to play. In fact, many of the great economists have argued for land value taxation. Clever innovative policies can prevent everyday people losing out and preserve financial stability.
Companies Extracting Rent Too
Finally we should mention companies too. In classical theory, markets were perfectly competitive and so only landowners had a monopoly position. But in the modern world we know that as companies grow they can often reduce unit costs. Many markets are not competitive. And management theory explicitly recommends strategies for making permanent profits that cannot be competed away. Warren Buffet invests in companies that have not only a competitive advantage (a ‘castle’) but also some form of ‘moat’ in his opinion: a particular talent or dominant market position that prevents other companies from stealing their competitive advantage. Thus management theory 
Finance, Tax and Tax Avoidance
Banking, tax and tax avoidance just makes things worse. If banks can earn money on appreciating assets like land, and if regulators push them in directions of reduced risk, then they will allow rich individuals to speculate on land, increasing the buying power of rich people. If companies can reduce tax by increasing leverage, they can increase the returns of the remaining owners even more, whilst at the same time making their long term position more fragile. And complex tax systems 
Solutions
We can say that there are three general classes of solutions: competition, taxation and common asset funds.
Competition is often lauded by the right wing, but in reality Britain has many markets which are less competitive than the recent past. The economist has measured the mark up: the difference between the price of something and the cost of producing it; and found that mark ups in Britain have increased. There are many ways to increase competition: community or state-owned competitors could be introduced; companies could be prevented from merging or highly taxed for doing so, and the definitions of market power could be enlarged. Each industry could be encouraged to offer competitive goods.
Taxation is fundamental. At present, wage income is taxed progressively, but wealth is not. Land is not taxed. Implementing a land value tax is theoretically neat and practically possible. Wealth held in companies increasing their market power is more difficult. The corporation tax is being reduced and does not target very well the permanent ‘rent’ aspect of profit, but rather all reported taxable profit. Large companies such as Amazon have learned ways of eliminating their taxable profit or pushing it to tax havens, whilst increasing their dominant market position. Intelligent corporate taxation could help. A cashflow tax on domestic sales less domestic costs would reverse the ‘race to the bottom’ by giving exporters an incentive to relocate to the UK. Taxing market capitalisation (apportioned by sales in particular countries) could begin to tax those companies like amazon who are increasing their market power but hiding their profits. An international wealth tax could also help.
Wealth funds are the final approach. Many of the most successful economies, such as Singapore and Norway implement wealth funds for their citizens. Investing on behalf of your people allows a country to capture a larger portion of investible wealth and may also help exporters by weakening the currency. This would mean that taxation would not carry the burden of both supporting the poor and paying for public services.
