\documentclass[]{tufte-handout}

% ams
\usepackage{amssymb,amsmath}

\usepackage{ifxetex,ifluatex}
\usepackage{fixltx2e} % provides \textsubscript
\ifnum 0\ifxetex 1\fi\ifluatex 1\fi=0 % if pdftex
  \usepackage[T1]{fontenc}
  \usepackage[utf8]{inputenc}
\else % if luatex or xelatex
  \makeatletter
  \@ifpackageloaded{fontspec}{}{\usepackage{fontspec}}
  \makeatother
  \defaultfontfeatures{Ligatures=TeX,Scale=MatchLowercase}
  \makeatletter
  \@ifpackageloaded{soul}{
     \renewcommand\allcapsspacing[1]{{\addfontfeature{LetterSpace=15}#1}}
     \renewcommand\smallcapsspacing[1]{{\addfontfeature{LetterSpace=10}#1}}
   }{}
  \makeatother

\fi

% graphix
\usepackage{graphicx}
\setkeys{Gin}{width=\linewidth,totalheight=\textheight,keepaspectratio}

% booktabs
\usepackage{booktabs}

% url
\usepackage{url}

% hyperref
\usepackage{hyperref}

% units.
\usepackage{units}


\setcounter{secnumdepth}{-1}

% citations

% pandoc syntax highlighting

% longtable
\usepackage{longtable,booktabs}

% multiplecol
\usepackage{multicol}

% strikeout
\usepackage[normalem]{ulem}

% morefloats
\usepackage{morefloats}


% tightlist macro required by pandoc >= 1.14
\providecommand{\tightlist}{%
  \setlength{\itemsep}{0pt}\setlength{\parskip}{0pt}}

% title / author / date
\title{Tax Heaven: Revolutionising Taxation and Welfare}
\author{Gordon Styles and Stephen Stretton (Editors)}
\date{2019-04-26}


\begin{document}

\maketitle




\newpage

\includegraphics{OtherPictures/RTW.png}

\hypertarget{acknowledgments}{%
\section{Acknowledgments}\label{acknowledgments}}

The editors would like to extend their gratitude to the authors and to
all who have helped in the writing of this draft book, in particular to
Heather McKay, Angela Dennis, Chris Crompton, Jiama, Selvin Kwong, Neale
Upstone, John McCone, Jasper Sky, Thibault Laurentjoye, Mike Reiss,
Sacha Anthony, Mat Sayer, Mark Wadsworth, Tom Ward, Dirk Heine, Drew
Jackson, Sarah Hafner, Ian Cook, Jo Wheeler and Christopher Downing for
assistance, comments, conversations, support and work. Remembering
Adrian Wrigley for introducing Stephen to many of the ideas herein.

\newpage

\hypertarget{chapter-1-facing-a-perfect-storm.}{%
\section{CHAPTER 1: FACING A PERFECT
STORM.}\label{chapter-1-facing-a-perfect-storm.}}

The film `A Perfect Storm' describes the true story of a fishing trawler
facing an epic storm.

A group of New England fishermen had fallen on hard times after a series
of poor catches. Their captain, played in the film by the actor George
Clooney, hired a boat for one final fishing trip of the year. The
trawler sailed out into the mid-Atlantic. After much fruitless
searching, they finally struck fish. Turning for home, they hoped to get
the catch back whilst still fresh. Unfortunately, a storm was brewing -
and not just any storm. Three separate weather systems had merged to
create a `weather bomb' of unusual intensity. Meteorologists warned of a
serious threat to life.

The fishermen faced a dilemma. Should they attempt to land their catch
whilst still fresh? To do so, they would need to risk their lives by
sailing back on a direct route, straight through the storm.
Alternatively, they could avoid the storm by sailing further out to sea.
After this detour, the fish would no longer be fresh, and they would be
out of pocket.

Added to this dilemma were communication and leadership issues. The
storm had damaged the radio, making it difficult to get information or
call for help. The captain (we'll call him `Clooney' after the actor
playing him), whilst charismatic, lacked good judgment. He took the risk
and sailed into the storm.

Taking a step back from their immediate plight, it seems odd that
Clooney and his men took such a severe risk. Why were they in that
situation in the first place? Perhaps there were two reasons.

First, the seas were no longer as bountiful as they once were. In the
1950s, the Grand Banks off Newfoundland teemed with fish. But
overfishing led to a collapse in stocks. Thus our crew needed to go
further out to sea, where more plentiful stocks remained. Second, the
fishermen lacked economic security in their lives. They had to fish to
keep food on the table. Beyond their own homes, they owned little. The
boat itself was owned by an investor who expected a return without doing
anything quite so dangerous as heading out to sea.

In other words, the fishermen were in a situation that was neither safe
nor fair - and the lack of fairness led them to take dangerous risks.
Moreover, their lives were defined by a world of scarcity, a world that
had been depleted by over-exploitation of natural resources.

\hypertarget{spaceship-earth}{%
\section{Spaceship Earth}\label{spaceship-earth}}

What has the `Perfect Storm' got to do with the future of the planet? On
Earth, we are facing a similar situation as did Clooney and his crew.
There are warnings of a dangerous future ahead for all of us. Climate
scientists warn of a much hotter planet, with more intense storms and
rising seas. Should we ignore the warnings and steam ahead, like
Clooney, or recognise the dangers we face and try to mitigate them?

Even if we accept the scientists' warnings and resolve to act on them,
our situation remains very tricky. You and I have little control over
the direction of the world economy. There is no single captain of the
`Good Ship Earth.' Indeed, most of us have little idea how exactly the
controls of our economy work.

This book is about a centrally important set of controls which determine
the focus and trajectory of our economy: Taxation. In this book, we show
how intelligent and principled changes to the tax system could shift the
economy towards a brighter future. We link taxation to substantive
concerns of our daily lives and our long-term collective future,
including welfare benefits, property rights, wealth accumulation,
environmental health and safety, energy and housing policy.

A libertarian critic might argue that people's interests and actions are
their own business. People should be free to do what they want, without
the government interfering. Hasn't the market economy had a good record?
Globally, humanity is richer, more secure, and living longer than ever
before. Poverty is also at record low levels.

There's a lot of truth in these observations - but it's also true that
there are very real storm clouds on the horizon. This book investigates
two major issues that threaten our future. The first is radical
environmental destabilisation. The second is economic unfairness and
insecurity. The richer and more populous humanity becomes, the more
environmental damage we cause. The more unequal society becomes, the
more we risk the hard-fought stability developed during the latter half
of the twentieth century. Unless we develop better economic habits, we
will damage the one planet that we have, and destroy the basic social
consensus on which our system depends.

In other words, humanity is in a situation that is neither safe nor fair
- and the lack of fairness is leading us to take dangerous risks.
Moreover, the economic game is unfolding in an era of extreme
environmental risks caused by polluters' failure to take responsibility
for pollution, made worse by the \emph{de facto} capture of governments
by polluters.

\hypertarget{your-safety-and-quality-of-life-directly-and-hugely-depend-on-achieving-major-tax-reforms}{%
\section{Your Safety and Quality of Life Directly and Hugely Depend on
Achieving Major Tax
Reforms}\label{your-safety-and-quality-of-life-directly-and-hugely-depend-on-achieving-major-tax-reforms}}

That's why we've set out to propose reforms in the way Britain's taxes
are organised that make our society safer, fairer, and more responsible
in economic and environmental terms. The same or similar reforms as
those we propose could also be usefully applied in many other countries.

Inequality takes many forms and strikes at the root of human security. A
rising proportion of young people struggle just to pay exorbitant
monthly rent on the flats where they live, and have no realistic
prospect of ever owning their own homes. This contributes to anxiety and
instability, and inhibits family formation. Basic issues like these -
concerns about the affordability of a decent lifestyle for ordinary
people - are among the economic phenomena that motivated us to write
this book. The question we ask is: How could we reform the tax system so
that it is truly fair and effective in delivering the results that
matter to ordinary people? Being able to afford a decent place to live,
being rewarded in proportion to one's contributive merit, and being
assured of a safe and stable global climate and sea-level are among the
results that really matter.

There's one more crucial question: How can we decide on and make these
changes together? The members of Clooney's crew had different
preferences. Some wanted to get home swiftly; others wanted to stay out
at sea and avoid the storm. But the fate of the crew was indivisible.
No-one was in a position to exit the boat earlier than the others, or
take a different route. They had to decide together and hence live or
die together. The fate of humanity is similar. Whatever our individual
preferences, we also face issues in common. We need to understand the
controls of our economy so we can shift its trajectory in a safer,
fairer direction. If our society is analogous to Clooney's boat, our
economy is akin to the boat's engine, and our taxation system is its
rudder. That's why our focus in this text is on the British economy's
control systems: not just on the rudder, but on the processes for
deciding whether to shift the rudder in one direction or another.

Throughout our analysis, we steer clear of the god-like perspective of
meteorologists, with their satellites and computer models, and constrain
our analysis to the ground-level, human perspective of Clooney and his
men. We therefore don't make it part of our task to demonstrate that the
meteorologists and climate scientists are right about the dangers of
rising atmospheric carbon levels. That issue is within scope of many
other texts - and we've read enough of them to be very confident that
climate science isn't a hoax. (We recommend the website
skepticalscience.com for good, easy-to-read information about climate
science, and rebuttals of mistaken talking-points often repeated by
`climate skeptics.') We proceed from the credible assumption that
threats to the stability and safety of the climate due to rising
atmospheric greenhouse gas levels are very real, indeed existential, and
need to be dealt with. The storm, in other words, is strong and rising.
It will get much fiercer in years and decades to come.

The trawler and the fishermen in Clooney's boat were a combined
mechanical and a social system. In determining the system's fate, what
mattered was not only how well the boat's engine and rudder were
working, but also how well Clooney was directing the crew. We face a
similar situation with our economy and the political system that guides
it. That's why our analysis considers two major economic questions, both
of which need to be solved together: How can we prevent environmental
destruction? And what constitutes a just distribution of wealth and
property? In both cases, we're interested in taxation as set of controls
over the economy and the consequent impact on human lives - and the
economy's wider impact on the physical world.

We can phrase these questions in economic and political terms. The
economist would ask: Why do pollution and economic insecurity persist
amidst such wealth? Is there a remedy to these ills? The politician
might ask: How can we change course together? We are in the same boat,
after all. There is only one planet that we all sit on, one biosphere of
which we are all living parts - and as a species, we are, for better or
worse, now the most powerful force guiding its fate.

If we think of our economy as akin to Clooney's boat, money is the fuel
coursing through its engine. Although humanity has developed almost
god-like powers, we are new to their exercise. We lack experience in
steering our boat, we don't fully understand how its engine works, and
we also are constantly confronted with the human problems of a bickering
crew. It's like we have a boat with a hugely powerful engine, but a crew
with little competence in sailing it. We are in the terrifying position
of being masters of our own environment, even as we are not quite
masters of ourselves.

\hypertarget{is-change-achievable}{%
\subsection{Is Change Achievable?}\label{is-change-achievable}}

Some have said that it's easier to see the end of the planet than the
end of capitalism. Money has long been recognised as dangerous to the
human soul - two and a half millennia ago, the philosopher Plato
bemoaned a decline of honourable standards of behaviour caused, he said,
by a `secret desire for treasure.'

In the song `Don't stop me now' by Queen, the lead vocalist, Freddie
Mercury, sang that the world is `turning inside out.' Ideas in the minds
of human beings become embodied in physical form through economics, and
market forces relentlessly generate changes in technology, disrupting
any sense of permanence. We are in a world powered by money and ideas.
Our civilisation's reigning set of concepts about the intersection of
money and ideas, the two powerful forces driving our economy, is called
economics.

Economists study scarcity, amongst other things. In this text, we focus
on three forms of scarcity: Space, time, and natural resources. Space is
limited, although it is more limited in some places, e.g.~Hong Kong,
than in others, e.g.~Siberia. Time is limited too. What I do with the
hours of my day today is irreversible, and my time is unrecoverable.

And finally, natural resources like fossil energy are limited. Humans of
our era have built a civilisation that is powered primarily by stored-up
sunlight in the form of compounds of carbon and hydrogen: Coal, oil, and
gas. About 85\% of our our primary energy today is delivered by fossil
fuels, with nuclear power, hydroelectricity, and renewables (wind,
solar, tidal and geothermal power) delivering the rest. It took millions
of years for geological processes to form the fossil carbon and
hydrocarbon fuels that we've burned in less than two centuries. By
releasing their combustion products into the atmosphere, our use of this
stored-up sunlight has markedly changed its chemical composition in a
way that is causing it to trap more infrared radiation (heat radiation),
adding enormous amounts of heat energy to land, sea and atmosphere,
thereby ensuring more frequent and intense storms, floods and droughts
in the future, as well as rising sea levels as seaweater thermally
expands and glaciers in Greenland, West Antarctica and elsewhere melt.

We must change this trajectory, and take carbon back out of the
atmosphere on a net basis as soon as possible, or self-reinforcing
feedback loops in the carbon-climate system will kick in that will,
within a century or two at most, cause us to lose London, New York City,
Shanghai, Hamburg, the Netherlands, Florida, Bangladesh, the Nile Delta
and many other regions to the sea, as well as make large parts of the
planet uninhabitable. For example, climate scientists expect summer
outdoor daytime temperatures in North Africa and the Middle East to be
so hot by late in this century - within the lifetimes of people who are
children today - that they will be fatal within less than an hour. Mass
migrations and wars are among the likely results.

But one great issue that makes it very difficult to shift course from
our current trajectory, even though it is pointed straight toward
shipwreck and disaster, is sheer momentum. Our whole economic way of
life is `locked in' to a particular course and the message is `don't
stop me now.' The incentives built into our economic system reward
carrying on as usual, not changing course.

In this book we take a different interpretation of Queen's song. We have
been so through much as a planet and as species. There's no good reason
to destroy much of the natural world through environmental change. And
there's no reason to disrupt the living conditions of our children so
radically either. So let's not stop taking action to prevent these
calamities.

So if the world of ideas - in particular, economic ideas - now
influences the very fate of our planet, how on earth did we get into
this situation in the first place? To get a sense of this, let's first
go back in time a couple of centuries to the era of Adam Smith and the
economic concepts that first gained currency in his time. Then we'll run
the clock forward, observing revolutions of politics, technology, and
ideas.

\newpage

\hypertarget{chapter-1-revolutions-in-the-minds-of-men}{%
\section{CHAPTER 1: REVOLUTIONS IN THE MINDS OF
MEN}\label{chapter-1-revolutions-in-the-minds-of-men}}

Let's go on a voyage through time. Imagine you had a magic carpet that
allowed you to flit across the continents and centuries at will, and
that you set out to see first-hand how some of the cornerstone ideas of
our economic system came into being. Ready? Let's have a look
around\ldots{}

\hypertarget{in-the-beginning-came-adam}{%
\section{1.1 In the Beginning Came
Adam}\label{in-the-beginning-came-adam}}

UNDER STARRY SKIES, distant in time and space from our present-day
fishermen, sits a learned professor, beavering away at his manuscript.
The year is 1773; the location, Kirkaldy, a small town in Scotland; the
author, Adam Smith (1723-90). The full title of Smith's great work would
be `An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations.'

On this cool and starlit night, Smith was writing the fifth and final
book of the `Wealth of Nations', entitled `On the Revenue of the
Sovereign or Commonwealth'. Smith asked a series of questions, such as
how should the activity of the government be funded, and which taxes a
state should impose.

\includegraphics{ChapterPictures/AdamSmithSmall.png} \emph{Plaque
marking the site in Kirkcaldy where Smith lived.}

Whilst Smith worked by candlelight, far across the oceans, in Boston
Harbour in what was then the British colony of North America, some
demonstrators had boarded ships of the British East India Company and
were throwing chests of tea into the sea. The demonstrators' objection:
The British state was collecting taxes from them, yet had refused to
give them representation in the British parliament. From this dispute,
the American Revolution was born. Adam Smith himself agreed with the
American revolutionaries that the North American colonies should be
represented in the British parliament in proportion to the taxes they
paid.

Revolution was also brewing in France. In 1766, French economist and
statesman Anne Robert Jacques Turgot had said: ``The art of taxation
consists in so plucking the goose as to procure the largest quantity of
feathers with the least possible amount of squawking.'' Francois
Quesnay, one of the first true economists, in 1758 had argued for a
single tax on the value of land to replace all other taxes in his
monograph \emph{Tableau Économique.} His advice was ignored, however,
and a land-tax system of this kind was never applied. By 1789, the geese
had not only squawked - they had overthrown the farmer, guillotined him,
and taken control of the farm. The French Revolution had arrived.

\hypertarget{from-rural-to-urban-land}{%
\subsection{From Rural to Urban Land}\label{from-rural-to-urban-land}}

Let's take our magic carpet across to the western edge of North America
and a century forward in time. A journalist in San Francisco is learning
his craft. He is fascinated by a subject which was then still called
`political economy.' He's interested in one question in particular: Why
is there so much poverty in the midst of so much technological progress?
The journalist, Philadephia-born Henry George (1839-97), son of an
English immigrant, sees that it is in the biggest, most advanced cities,
with the most technological advancement, where the worst, most grinding
poverty is to be encountered. The book for which Mr.~George became
famous was called \emph{Progress and Poverty.} It became a bestseller,
outselling all books published in the 1870s, apart from the Bible. Yet
Henry George's name is not known to many today.

George's work echoed that of David Ricardo (1772-1823), a banker who
became a renowned economic theorist. Ricardo, who remains well-known
amongst economists today, had argued that an agricultural landlord
contributed nothing to the well-being of society. He merely extracted
the surplus from the land once the costs of labour and tools had been
paid. This surplus is known as `rent.' As had been previously argued by
Adam Smith, the best tax was a tax on rent. Whilst Ricardo modelled a
rural economy, Henry George was concerned with urban land. Ownership of
urban land allowed landowners to benefit as society developed and urban
areas densified, even if they had contributed nothing to the increase in
land values. George popularised the message that the remedy was to tax
urban landlords. He used beautiful words that everyday folk could
understand.

\emph{``Man is the only animal whose desires increase as they are fed;
the only animal that is never satisfied''} (George
\protect\hyperlink{ref-George1879}{1879})

Inspired by Henry George, a woman by the name of Elizabeth Magie
(1866-1948) invented a board game called the \emph{Landlords' Game}. The
game illustrated that without a tax on urban land, property tended to
get monopolized and those who owned it extracted rent from those who did
not. If, however, landowners were taxed, then a stable and fair (if
rather boring) outcome ensued. Later, the game was shorn of the
beneficial, but boring rules, leaving a game where an unstable and
unfair (albeit fun) set of rules remained. The original political
implications of the game were lost, and the new version of the game was
marketed as `Monopoly.' The goal of Monopoly is to own the whole board,
and to drive all the other players into bankruptcy. This makes for
exciting play, but it was the antithesis of a model for a system of
widely-shared prosperity. The lessons of Magie's original version of the
game and the insights of Henry George remain germane in our day, and
accordingly, we will consider the case for a land value tax later in
this book.

\hypertarget{war-and-progress}{%
\subsection{War and Progress}\label{war-and-progress}}

Henry George inspired many of his readers, including the young Winston
Churchill (1874-1965) and British prime minister David Lloyd George
(1863-1945). Towards the end of the First World War, there was even a
budget which implemented a Land Value Tax, the `People's Budget.'
However, due to the resistance of landowners and the difficulties of
land valuation, this budget was never implemented. Nevertheless, from
the late nineteenth century through the whole of the twentieth century,
and particularly after the Second World War, the conditions of the poor
improved. The curse of destitution caused by the oppressive rents
charged by slum landlords was almost banished.

One great milestone in this history of progress was the Beveridge
report. Released in 1942 by an interdepartmental committee of civil
servants chaired by Liberal economist Lord Beveridge (1879-1963), it
laid the basis for the post-war welfare state. Its aim was to banish
five great evils: ``Squalor, ignorance, want, idleness, and disease''
(Beveridge \protect\hyperlink{ref-Beveridge1942}{1942}). After World War
Two, Beveridge's report became the basis for a social security system
encompassing public education, public housing, a national health
service, and macroeconomic management aimed at ensuring full employment.

World War II had almost bankrupted Britain. Britain had financed the war
through borrowing. The public debt ratio peaked at 238\% of GDP in 1947.
Despite this, postwar Britain soon rebuilt itself. It also managed to
provide for its people a standard of living greater than that which
prevailed before the war. Britain pursued a policy of low interest
rates, moderate inflation, and high growth. As a result, the burden of
public debt dropped to 70\% of GDP in 30 years (Reinhart, Camen M. and
Kenneth S. RogoffReinhart and Rogoff
\protect\hyperlink{ref-ReinhartCamenM.andKennethS.RogoffReinhart2010}{2010}).
These accomplishments are in themselves remarkable.

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics{ChapterPictures/HistoryOfDebt.png}
\caption{01-historyofdebt}
\end{figure}

Beveridge was successful in his mission to lay the foundation for a
comprehensive welfare-state. His reforms helped reduce the prevalence of
the five great evils and transformed the previously hellish conditions
of the poor. But we have not yet achieved Heaven on Earth. There are
still great evils facing us: The destruction of the environment, a lack
of affordable housing in many cities and towns, extreme inequalities of
wealth and income (which in many cases cannot be justified by any
corresponding differences in contributive merit), and some risks
attendant on automation. We will explain why these evils arise, and
explore how they can be fixed.

\hypertarget{the-global-machine-and-the-global-mission}{%
\subsection{The Global Machine and the Global
Mission}\label{the-global-machine-and-the-global-mission}}

Returning to the present day from our brief historical survey, we note
that the subject once known as political economy is now called economics
- even though the distribution of wealth and income remains driven in no
small part by \emph{political} choices. In our time, great container
ships cross the oceans and aircraft roar across the skies. Massive
machines in far-off lands churn out smartphones which seize the
attention of billions of people for many hours each day. Many people
live with more consumer comforts than in the past. Some things are
cheap: It is relatively cheap to fly off to sun-kissed beaches on
foreign shores. But some things are very expensive: It is wildly
expensive to buy a flat in London, for example.

The machinery of commerce is devoted to two purposes: To give people
what they desire (or at least, what they can be coaxed into buying), and
to make a profit in so doing. The commercial machine works remarkably
smoothly in many of its day-to-day operations. But there are rumblings
of discontent. In 1848, Karl Marx wrote in the Communist Manifesto that
the ``spectre of communism'' was haunting Europe. Today, the rising
dangers of environmental destruction and runaway technology, and the
dysfunctions of a state run by and for the rent-seeking superrich, keen
to enrich themselves still further, cast shadows on this vast machine
for the happy fulfilment of our consumer desires.

In America in 2016, a man who is very good at telling people what they
want to hear promised to `drain the swamp' in Washington DC. This man
would soon become president of the United States of America. It would be
natural to take these words to mean that the army of smart-suited
lobbyists whose job it is to nudge the ship of state to favour the
interests of their corporate employers would be sent packing. Nothing of
the sort happened. Indeed, the swamp got even marshier and more
sulphurous. The poor, who had seen nothing much in the way of
improvements in prosperity despite forty years of productivity growth in
the US, were increasingly addicted to prescription painkillers. In the
United Kingdom and the United States, statistics showed the average
lifespan of citizens had stopped increasing.

This is by now a truly global civilisation. And scientists are warning
that something truly global is wrong. Groups of scientists are calling
for radical shifts in our global infrastructure, aiming at an end the
burning of fossil fuels within a couple of decades. The great machinery
of commerce, which has since the end of the Second World War been
devoted to giving us more and more stuff, will need to be turned in a
new direction and given a new purpose.

To turn around this great global machine, we need to apply not only the
great resources of the state, but also the dynamism, flexibility, and
capacity for rapid action of the private sector. We need to harness the
profit motive for the good of the planet. It needs to become cheaper and
more profitable to do good than to do harm. And that means we need to
tax the damages that individuals and companies cause to the living
planet. In this book, we outline how the tax system can be reformed to
achieve this outcome, not only by changing the incentives of the private
sector in one country, but also by ensuring that other countries have a
reason to follow suit. The reforms we propose will transform the
prospects of early-adopter countries so significantly that others will
have no choice but to follow their lead.

\hypertarget{of-flats-and-of-flights}{%
\subsection{Of Flats and of Flights}\label{of-flats-and-of-flights}}

It's now a wet November evening. Let me introduce Peter and his wife,
Lucy, who are shivering in their North London flat, pressing refresh on
their email program and looking at their phones. They are waiting to see
whether their offer has been accepted on a two-bedroom flat in a rundown
neighbourhood of the city.

An advert flicks up for a getaway flight to somewhere sunnier. If they
can take the time off, then they can get away to a nice sunny island for
a week. The small flat they are purchasing is, by normal standards,
inordinately expensive. They will be paying off their mortgage until
they reach retirement age. But the flight is cheap: They can book it for
less than one day's wages each.

To Peter and Lucy, this is the usual way of things, although they don't
like it much. Their friend Mel pointed out to them that the world is
running out of time to tackle one of the major environmental problems of
all time: Climate destabilisation due to increased greenhouse gas levels
in the atmosphere. Lucy feels a certain amount of guilt in the back of
her mind for taking a holiday and the associated carbon emissions, but
is swayed by the low cost of the flights and her felt need to get away
from the damp cold and stress of London. When buying a roof over their
heads is so expensive and so stressful, any normal person would need a
little relief. She and Peter book a flight to sunny Mallorca.

\hypertarget{are-the-prices-right}{%
\subsection{Are the Prices Right?}\label{are-the-prices-right}}

This book is about the prices of things, and how these are influenced by
the taxation system. Houses and flights already have some taxes applied
to them. If you live in a house, you pay Council Tax. And if you take a
flight, you pay Air Passenger Duty. Putting a higher tax on houses will
\emph{reduce} the purchase price of the house. That's because the value
of the house depends in part on the obligations associated with it,
taxation included.

This book does not argue for environmental taxes primarily to change the
behaviour of consumers. Rather, it seeks to change the economy to
provide goods in ways that do not damage the living planet. Sometimes,
this will be difficult. It's hard to design aeroplanes that do not burn
oil products (although it is possible, albeit financially and
energetically expensive, to produce low-carbon synthetic kerosene). But
technologies change and adapt to market demands. And if zero-carbon
planes cannot be designed, then perhaps those who fly should pay for the
capture of carbon dioxide from the air and its permanent safe storage.
The tax on flying, and on other activities that produce greenhouse
gases, should be enough to encourage people to capture those gases from
the air if they cannot be eliminated directly.

The prices of things should be just. A just price requires a just tax
system. A just tax system will cause people to pay for the damage they
cause to the environment. A just system will also ensure that nobody
gets rich \emph{merely by owning} some of the things in life that are in
limited supply, such as land. In short, in a just economy, justice and
social benefit go hand-in-hand; fairness and efficiency are two sides of
the same coin. That is the essence of Tax Heaven, and the aim of the
reforms we propose in what follows.

There's an old joke about a man who asks for directions and gets the
response: ``Well, if I were going there, I wouldn't start from here.''
It's not just the final state of affairs that must be just, but also the
pathway for getting from here to there. Later on, we will try to show
how to transition in a fair way to a just tax system.

\hypertarget{bringing-back-self-respect}{%
\subsection{Bringing Back
Self-Respect}\label{bringing-back-self-respect}}

Further down the street from Peter and Lucy lives Fred. Fred is on
benefits. He took a job at one point a couple of years ago, but he found
that once this happened, his benefits were cut off. There was a gap
between his new wage and the benefits coming in. As a result, he didn't
have the money for the rent.

The UK has rolled out a reform known as `Universal Credit,' which
integrates four income-related benefits into one. The `benefits
withdrawal' rate (in effect the income tax on additional income) on
Universal Credit is 63\%. This means that you lose two-thirds of the
extra income you get from working (rather than simply staying on
benefits and not working). Does that seem like a deal likely to motivate
the long-term unemployed to get back into work? Some of the problems
with the new system also relate to administration and design issues. The
Universal Credit system has also seen delays in payments, which has
caused problems for recipients, like Fred, many of whom have no savings
to see them through short-term cash flow bottlenecks.

It does not have to be this way.

\hypertarget{questions-for-change}{%
\subsection{Questions for Change}\label{questions-for-change}}

In the next section, we define five major questions that this enquiry
seeks to answer. They are as follows:

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\tightlist
\item
  What would an economy fit for our children look like?
\item
  What are the economic conditions for widespread and sustainable
  prosperity?
\item
  How can we define a better tax and social security system?
\item
  How can the changes be achieved?
\item
  What advantages would such changes bring?
\end{enumerate}

Onwards then, to defining the future\ldots{}

\newpage

\hypertarget{chapter-2-progress-and-problems}{%
\section{CHAPTER 2: PROGRESS AND
PROBLEMS}\label{chapter-2-progress-and-problems}}

This book is addressed to a wide readership: Economists, scientists,
politicians, professionals, and the public alike. Everyone, in fact, who
cares about two issues not usually understood to be intimately
connected: Establishing a fair economy which rewards contributive merit
in proportion to contribution (tempered by compassion for the elderly or
disabled), and preventing catastrophic climate disruption.

In fact, these two issues are indeed intimately linked. If we simply add
the dimension of time, we quickly see why fairness is grotesquely
betrayed in a world which ignores catastrophic climate disruption caused
by human economic activity. If we fail to stop pumping garbage into the
atmosphere, our children and grandchildren will be unfairly burdened by
living in a chaotic world of crisis and destruction. It's that simple.
Just add the dimension of time, and climate safety becomes a matter of
fairness - profoundly so.

Across the social spectrum, people are starting to lose hope. The poor
are losing hope because of their precarious economic situation; the
wider public because of a lack of certainty that society can fix
critical issues such as preventing radical climate disruption. Even the
wealthiest in society are showing signs of fear, building bunkers and
preparing for the worst. But with careful design and application of
policy, and sufficient political will, all is not lost.

What would an economy fit for our children look like - a society and
economy that promotes the wealth and happiness of its citizens? Such a
framework would define, create, preserve, and fairly distribute wealth,
both natural and man-made. To build an economy that enables and fosters
happiness, we will need different metrics than those economists
conventionally use today - metrics encompassing both economic security
and satisfaction of needs, as well as measures of free time, manageable
stress levels, and social stability. A successful economy is one that is
good for people and for the planet. Gross domestic product (GDP) is only
one among many relevant measures.

\hypertarget{what-are-the-economic-conditions-for-sustainable-widepread-prosperity}{%
\subsection{What are the Economic Conditions for Sustainable Widepread
Prosperity?}\label{what-are-the-economic-conditions-for-sustainable-widepread-prosperity}}

To define a desirable economy and society, we need first to determine
the economic conditions that would be necessary for sustainable and
widespread prosperity.

Adam Smith wrote what is probably one of the two most famous books on
economics, \emph{The Wealth of Nations}, more than two centuries ago, at
a time when three revolutions were underway: The political revolution in
America and France, the nascent industrial revolution in Britain, and
the intellectual revolution that he himself played a part in. The world
has seen tremendous technological progress and economic growth since his
time. Yet major problems persist to this day - including widespread
economic insecurity and existentially dangerous forms of pollution.

Why, given two and a half centuries of stunning technological and
economic progress, do these issues still persist? Why, despite the
growth in global wealth, are many people still existing in precarious
circumstances? Why is there environmental pollution, despite the fact
that humanity has the wealth and technological ability to prevent it?
The 19th century reformer Henry George tried to answer these questions
in his seminal text \emph{Progress and Poverty}. He argued that it was
the exploitation of the private ownership of land that caused poverty.
Clearly, this is not the sole reason for the issues that society
currently faces, but we can draw from his analysis a few lessons that
shape our recommendations. The very structure of our economic system is
at fault: It does not place explicit value on the well-being and
happiness of people. Our economic system has not allowed us to take full
advantage of the technological progress we have made in ways that serve
human happiness, fairness, safety, and environmental sustainability. In
order to come to grips with this reality, we must fight fire with fire -
i.e.~we must adapt the tools of the current system to combat its
weaknesses. What we seek is instruments of economic policy that will
re-orient human efforts in desirable and necessary directions. This
quest is in the tradition of what used to be called \emph{political
economy}.

\hypertarget{evolution-of-political-economy}{%
\subsection{Evolution of Political
Economy}\label{evolution-of-political-economy}}

Economics is the study of activities that are, at least in part,
motivated by financial gain. The term \emph{political economy} comes
from Koine Greek, the \emph{lingua franca} of the eastern Roman Empire
from the fourth century BCE onward. \emph{Polis} means city-state, the
main form of political organisation in ancient Greece. `Economy' comes
from two Greek words: \emph{Oikos}, meaning household, and \emph{Nomos}
meaning law. Thus \emph{Oikonomos} means household management and the
root of \emph{political economy} is `household managment of the state'.
Classical political economy treatises include the works of Adam Smith,
David Ricardo, John Stuart Mill, and Karl Marx.

Classical political economy considered how the economy's production was
distributed amongst participants in the system. A question at the very
heart of political economy has been that of just distribution. Taxation
is a way to pay for public goods, but it is also a means to remedy
distribution when it is inefficient or unfair. This makes the study of
political economy, or economics, powerful, as economics has implications
on the income, wealth, and well-being of all individuals. One can
believe an economic theory for `scientific' reasons, but one might also
support a given theory because it furthers his own interests or
ideological preconceptions. This makes economic discourse somewhat
fraught - indeed political. Self-interested parties with deep pockets
can influence (and have influenced) the public to assume the veracity of
certain economic theories which are in reality normative ideologies, and
lead them to be considered authoritative, by simple expedients such as
generously endowing professorships of economics at leading universities,
funding think-tanks, and owning newspapers (and hiring their chief
editors).

Theories of political economy often have questions of taxation and
property at their heart. The efficacy of a particular taxation regime
can be considered on two grounds: The extent to which it incentivises
efficiency, and the extent to which it promotes fairness. These
questions depend not only to economic processes (regulatory and
infrastructural frameworks for production and competition), but also on
the structures of taxation and of private property ownership. What
assets can be owned, who in fact owns them, and how much tax should they
pay for doing so? These questions are at the heart of economic
management. Desirable economic outcomes depend not only the structure of
economic activity, but also on the taxation system and the system of
property rights.

Our starting point is Adam Smith's model, since his work has helped to
define the predominant economic view of the two centuries that followed
the publication of his seminal work.

\hypertarget{adam-smiths-model}{%
\subsection{Adam Smith's Model}\label{adam-smiths-model}}

In \emph{The Wealth of Nations}, Smith set out a model of how economic
growth comes about, and how it can lead to widespread prosperity. He
argued that the division of labour leads to higher levels of
productivity, giving the example of a pin factory, where dividing the
process of manufacturing pins into discrete steps and assigning workers
to become efficient specialists in a single step leads to more pins
being produced for the same total number of hours worked. By focusing on
a single task, a worker can do this task more quickly than if he has a
multitude of different jobs to do. This differentiation of jobs takes
place not only in a single enterprise, but also across the whole
economy. By specialising and trading, we can get more work done in a
given number of hours. The productivity of the economy as a whole rises
through specialisation.

If an entrepreneur makes an improvement in production processes, she can
lower her cost of production and still sell at the price her competitors
charge. In other words, she can make a higher profit. In the short term,
the advantages of the improvement accrue to her. Thus, the profit motive
provides an incentive to make improvements. Her competitors may notice
the improvement that she has made and replicate it. To retain market
share, they will lower their prices towards the new cost of production.
A price war to capture customers may result. After the competition has
taken its course, we will be left with a different situation. The price
of the good concerned will have fallen to just above the new production
cost. The long-term beneficiary of the technological improvement will be
everyone who purchases the product.

This combination of technological progress, the profit motive, and
competition can lead to widely spread prosperity. Whilst the initial
profit from the improvement accrues to the entrepreneur, the long-term
beneficiary from the reduced cost of production is the customer. If this
picture is correct, profit is a necessary but temporary phenomenon. It
is competed away, and as this occurs, society as a whole becomes richer.

However, this model relies on certain assumptions. One assumption is
that a production process, once improved, can be replicated. There must
be enough market participants for competition to work. If there is only
a single monopolist, or if market entry is prohibitively expensive for
entrepreneurs not already established in the particular line of
business, then competition will not work as described. If I own a big
monopoly with no competition, I can also own a permanent flow of profits
that competition will not touch. The beneficiary will be the owners of
the monopolist incumbent firm. Their profits, untouched by competition,
are termed `rents.'

Similarly, if the process relies on some factor of production that
cannot be replicated - for example, land - then the beneficiaries of
improvements will be the landlords. Imagine I own some land with
buildings on it. I can let the buildings, sit back, and enjoy the flow
of income, without having to work. This flow of income is also called
`rent.' Now, suppose that for reasons that have nothing to do with me,
regional wages increase. I respond by jacking up the rent that I charge
my tenants, taking away the improvement in their living-standard. I can
do this if I am a monopolist property owner, or I collude with other
property owners, or even if I and other property owners merely respond
to rising demand for better properties by raising our prices. Rent goes
up as wages increase.

We term these two forms of property income `generalised rent.'
Generalised rent is a permanent flow of income associated with an asset
that cannot be replicated. It is received by the owners of properties in
valuable locations and the shareholders of market-dominant companies. We
argue that generalised rent leads to expensive housing, stagnating
wages, and unmerited wealth gains for the already rich.

\hypertarget{wicked-externalities}{%
\subsection{Wicked Externalities}\label{wicked-externalities}}

So what about the problem of pollution? Damage to other people or their
interests is usually illegal. Examples could include injury or theft.
However, some economic activities which damage others are legal. Driving
a petrol car, which pollutes the environment, is legal and normal, but
nevertheless damages others' interests. Small indirect damages from many
independent sources can add up to a significant total. Imagine driving
into a major city at rush hour. Each car adds only a little congestion
and pollution, but together they add up to gridlock and unhealthy air.

When one person or company's behaviour damages another, it is termed by
economists as a `negative externality.' Negative externalities are a
form of economic theft, if they have not been appropriately regulated.
For example, if I throw my plastic waste into the ocean, it can then
damage fish and other marine life. My careless action has stolen from
the future of the ocean. If I play loud music late into the night, I
damage the interests of my neighbours, robbing them of sleep, making
them tired the next day, reducing their performance at work, getting
them into trouble. I am, in effect, stealing their tranquility.

Moreover, externalities that seem acceptable when societies are small
may prove problematic as they grow. For example, Newfoundland fishermen
could fish without constraints when their boats were small and their
numbers low. There were plenty of fish. But then the industry grew in
size. Fish stocks are not unlimited. If too many fish are taken, the
fish don't get a chance to reproduce, and fish stocks collapse. This is
what happened near Newfoundland. Fish used to be so plentiful that the
sea teemed with life and business boomed. The exhaustion of these stocks
through overfishing led to a collapse in both fish numbers and
opportunities for the fisherman to earn livelihoods, leading to problems
ranging from depression and divorce to community outmigration. This
complex of overuse, collapse, and attendant harms could be termed a
`wicked externality.'

Climate change is among the wickedest of externalities. Wicked
externalities such as climate change are damages caused by our actions
that affect others remote in time and space, without effective
governance systems to constrain them. For the planet as a whole, this
model is catastrophic. But there is a route out of this kind of economic
situation. Economic growth needs to be dematerialised or physically
circular. In other words, we need to decouple the impacts that economic
growth has on natural resource use and on the natural world - or even,
in some cases, make growth generate positive environmental
externalities, by seeking activities that are regenerative of ecosystems
(rather than degenerative) and setting financial incentives (through
regulated financial mechanisms) that make regenerative actions
remunerative and profitable. If in the past we've rewarded companies for
clearcutting forests, in future, we can reward companies to replant
deforested areas. We can rejig the system so that it's more profitable
to generate low-carbon electricity (nuclear, wind, or solar power, for
example) than electricity generated by burning fossil fuels. And so on.

\hypertarget{a-place-for-taxation}{%
\subsection{A Place for Taxation}\label{a-place-for-taxation}}

This discussion of the problems of pollution and precariousness has led
us to identify the two key phenomena of economic rent and negative
economic externalities. The problems are coming into focus. This leads
on to the grand-challenge question: What should be done? In governance
terms: Which policy tools can be employed to effect change?

Taxation is important in our economic model not just because it alters
the distribution of income, but also because it can be used to set
finely tunable economic incentives for the private sector. Classical
political economists, from Smith to Ricardo to Karl Marx, have argued
that the taxation system or redistribution of property are the two basic
categories of corrective tools for these issues. Later in this book, we
make recommendations for the design of a better, more functional tax
system, both in principle and in practice. However, political
feasibility is a key barrier to these changes. Prioritisation of strong
policy communication and smooth implementation are key tenets of any
successful public policy. A policy that's badly communicated or
implemented, even if well-conceived, will soon be rejected by outraged
citizens, and political opponents may persuade voters that the policy
was a bad idea in principle even if it was merely badly executed. That
can take a good policy idea off the public agenda for a generation.
Developing a \emph{theory of change} for successful policy communication
and implementation is therefore a key priority.

\hypertarget{principles-for-policy-change}{%
\subsection{Principles for Policy
Change}\label{principles-for-policy-change}}

Economists have been aware of the phenomena of `rent' and
`externalities' for many decades, and yet taxes which would correct
these economic distortions have only been imposed occasionally and
partially. Here, we make the case for a simple `change equation,' in
which the perceived benefits of any policy must overwhelm the perceived
costs. We can address this in two ways: Either we can make a
sufficiently passionate and positive case for these taxes, and thereby
overwhelm opposition; or we can reduce the costs of the proposed
changes, and hence the political resistance to them.

To illustrate this point, let's consider one example of revolutionary
change in the UK's social security system. As we noted earlier, a great
milestone in the history of social end economic progress in the UK was
the Beveridge report (Beveridge
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Beveridge1942}{1942}). Over seventy years ago, in
1943, liberal economist William Beveridge presented a report proposing a
comprehensive new welfare state. It laid the basis for greatly expanded
public services and benefits in United Kingdom after the Second World
War. Its objectives were to banish `want, ignorance, squalor, disease
and idleness.' Before the Second World War, these social evils ravaged
the lives of the poor in Britain.

The war itself destroyed many buildings, homes, and businesses, and
increased the national debt. And yet, the post-war government managed to
create a comprehensive welfare state where none existed before. It
included: the National Health Service; a system of social security
(welfare benefits); a state education system; public housing; and a
policy toolkit for `Keynesian' macroeconomic management that aimed to
achieve full employment. In this book, we'll focus on the social
security system.

Three principles guided the Beveridge report (Beveridge
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Beveridge1942}{1942}).

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  \emph{Radical}: Policies were designed from first principles, without
  fear or favour to social class or other interest groups.
\item
  \emph{Comprehensive}: It dealt with poverty, disease, bad housing,
  unemployment, and a lack of education.
\item
  \emph{A liberal social contract}: No means-testing and so no stifling
  of incentives; cooperation between the state, individuals, and firms.
\end{itemize}

Here, we adapt and expand these principles to the modern context in
which they now operate, through outlining our four-fold framework for
successful political change.

\hypertarget{principle-1-a-fundamental-review}{%
\subsection{\texorpdfstring{\emph{Principle 1: A Fundamental
Review}}{Principle 1: A Fundamental Review}}\label{principle-1-a-fundamental-review}}

Beveridge argued that the Second World War and its aftermath was `a time
for revolutions, not patching.' He offered a radical approach, informed
by the experience of the past, but not restricted by an excessive
devotion to the interests of one group or another. In short, his report
would be \emph{radical} (working from first principles) and prioritise
the \emph{common interest}.

We also aim to look at tax and welfare from first principles. We will
then apply those first principles without fear or favour. But are we at
a revolutionary time? Can we change a complex system like tax and
welfare from first principles, or is `patching' the only realistic
possibility? We will assert that change is possible if it is beneficial,
practical, and fair, and communicated well so that these qualities are
evident.

One does not make fundamental progress without thinking about what a
system should \emph{do} and what it should \emph{be}. We address this in
the `Tax in Principle' chapter. We need to be passionate about the
benefits that reform will bring. We consider these in the next section.

\hypertarget{principle-2-solving-great-social-evils}{%
\subsection{\texorpdfstring{\emph{Principle 2: Solving Great Social
Evils}}{Principle 2: Solving Great Social Evils}}\label{principle-2-solving-great-social-evils}}

Beveridge argued for a \emph{comprehensive} solution to the five `giant'
social problems of the poor. His report dealt primarily with want
(poverty) and disease (poor health). The other three `giants' were
ignorance (lack of education), squalor (poor housing), and idleness
(unemployment). As we mentioned before, his report laid the basis not
only for the UK's post-war social security system, but also the National
Health Service, public education, housing policy, and a system of
macroeconomic management aiming for full employment.

We still have Beveridge's giant social issues to some degree, but we are
also faced with new problems. This book, like Beveridge's report, is
devoted to several great societal challenges which we face now:

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  \emph{Excessive Concentration of Wealth and Income}: How can extreme
  inequality of income and wealth - especially inequality caused by
  arguably unfair means, exacerbated by the context of increasing
  automation - be reduced, and incomes and accrued wealth brought more
  in line with individuals' real contributive merit?
\item
  \emph{High Rent on Land and Resources}: Can can the radical and
  increasing unaffordability of renting or purchasing homes be
  countered?
\item
  \emph{Tax Evasion and Avoidance}: How can a tax system be designed
  that is both simpler and more difficult to evade?
\item
  \emph{Debt and Economic Imbalance}: How can the economy be rebalanced
  away from high debt and asset inflation, and towards balanced growth
  and wealth formation?
\item
  \emph{Pollution and Other Environmental Damage}: How can we deal
  effectively with the problems of climate change, ocean acidification,
  plastics pollution, over-fishing, and habitat and biodiversity loss,
  problems that impinge on all of us and which all of us contribute to
  causing?
\end{itemize}

It's not enough to imagine top-down plans that might, in priniple, solve
these problems if they were applied. We have to do so in a competent way
that involves everyone, or they won't in fact be applied. We cover this
matter in the next section.

\hypertarget{principle-3-a-social-contract-aligning-reward-and-contribution}{%
\subsection{\texorpdfstring{\emph{Principle 3: A Social Contract
Aligning Reward and
Contribution}}{Principle 3: A Social Contract Aligning Reward and Contribution}}\label{principle-3-a-social-contract-aligning-reward-and-contribution}}

Our new welfare system should not discourage work. It should encourage
service and contribution. We will study in detail Beveridge's third
principle (a liberal social contract, with no means-testing) to see if
and how a better welfare system might be created. This suggests the case
for a system with a universal component: We call this a `citizen's
dividend' (a form of basic income).

Such a system of universal benefits has practical advantages too. It
involves the \emph{integration} of the tax system with the benefits
system, so there is not a separate system of `means testing'. Means
testing is simply taking money away from individuals and families as
they earn more. This function can be most simply and easily carried out
through the tax system. Rewarding people for full and gainful employment
should be a priority for any successful system. Furthermore, we argue
for an integrated skills-training and work-experience system, not unlike
that which has long been standard in the German-speaking countries of
Europe.

\hypertarget{principle-4-minimising-barriers-to-change}{%
\subsection{\texorpdfstring{\emph{Principle 4: Minimising Barriers To
Change}}{Principle 4: Minimising Barriers To Change}}\label{principle-4-minimising-barriers-to-change}}

To Beveridge's three principles we add a fourth. Proposed changes should
be designed to maximise benefits and minimise resistance. In short, we
need to reduce barriers to change.

One barrier is the worry that some people have that they will be made
worse off by any changes. Firstly, there is the question of transitional
justice; secondly, political realism; and thirdly, the need to transform
the interests and specialisms of large companies, without provoking
resistance from them. We deal with these in turn.

Firstly, there is the matter of transitional justice. We need to ensure
not only that the final state is fair, but also that the transition
between the current system and the new is also fair. Resistance to
taxation changes is typically associated with concentrated losses
imposed on specific groups. These groups can easily mobilise to resist
new taxes. We need to ensure that no politically salient or vulnerable
group is made particularly worse off. One example of politically savvy
change is from Iran. When Iran eliminated a subsidy on transport fuels
such as diesel, it compensated individuals and companies with regular
monthly payments. The payments were sent to frozen bank accounts, and
each individual and company was given a letter with the frozen bank
account balance. The people could see the direct financial benefit of
the reform, and they realised that to achieve this financial benefit,
the fuel tax subsidy removal had to come into effect. This reduced the
resistance to the reform, and it went through.

Let's focus now on corporate lobbying. Companies have the means at their
disposal to defend their existing financial and regulatory interests.
Oil companies have successfully lobbied against policy actions to
conserve the stability and safety of the global climate. Taxes change
the nature of what activities are profitable. Taxes, which could change
the nature of these agents (for example, converting an oil company to a
renewables producer), cannot be imposed because these very same
companies resist the taxes, which they perceive as opposing their
interests (even if the reality is that they need not harm these
companies' long-term interests at all - they merely require a transition
to a new business model, and a re-investment of resources in new
technologies).

This is a catch-22 situation. We can't change the companies without
changing the tax system. But sometimes, we can't impose the new tax
system without changing the company, since they are able to effectively
resist policy changes. So instead, we need forms of tax that don't face
such resistance, but which lead to the transformation of companies in a
positive direction. We describe one option, the feebate, a little later
on.

\hypertarget{a-four-fold-framework-for-public-wealth}{%
\subsection{A Four-fold Framework for Public
Wealth}\label{a-four-fold-framework-for-public-wealth}}

What improvements could such changes make? There are four crucial
benefits to wider society of a better taxation system. We call these the
four realms of value: households, communities, nations, and the world.
We argue that our proposals can enhance genuine wealth at the level of
the individual, community, nation-state, and planet. For each of these
four realms, we also define a notion of social entrepreneurship.

These forms of entrepreneurship imply a new growth model for everyone -
one that is not based on increasing financialisation and debt issued on
limited assets, but rather on the development of productive industries
tasked with solving our collective problems. There's an overarching
concept too, which we term \emph{policy entrepreneurship.} That is, we
should break out of the monopoly of thought imposed on us by
neoclassical economics and neoliberal economic ideas, and instead
conceive of and try out practical solutions to our problems, without
ideological blinders.

\hypertarget{improvement-1-power-to-the-people}{%
\subsection{\texorpdfstring{\emph{Improvement 1: Power to the
People}}{Improvement 1: Power to the People}}\label{improvement-1-power-to-the-people}}

The current social security system is highly insecure: Benefits are
taken away from people when their conditions change, sometimes leading
them to go into arrears with their rent or other payments, and often
leading them into debt. The current social security system also
discourages work, since benefits are withdrawn as income increases (in
the Universal Credit system at a rate of 61\% for every £ increase in
income).

We argue that the UK government should simplify the existing income and
means-tested benefit system. Rather than the current system of
means-testing benefits, there would be a single system of basic income
and taxation. There would be a `simplifying' basic income payable to
everyone in society. There would also be a simplification of the system
of income taxation. A standard rate of 40\% is applied to all income up
to the point when someone reaches the top 1\% of incomes.

An optimal social security system would involve some funding from
sovereign wealth funds, as well as the creation of personal accounts
with shares in these funds, so that the people accumulate assets to
support them in hard times, and the state gains improved leverage of
companies in the service of directing them to engage in socially useful
production. So there would be citizen wealth funds, and assets would be
granted to individuals based on how much tax they had paid. There would
be a `target minimum level' of wealth and individual's tax would build
up their wealth up to this target level.

Our improvements would, we hope, lead to skill-based personal and social
entrepreneurship. A better system in which benefits would not be
withdrawn so rapidly as income increases, would: - encourage people to
increase their skill level,\\
- be well integrated with the taxation system and - support those who
enhance their communities in ways other than simply earning money (for
example, by caring for elders or raising a child). It would also allow
division of labour with minimal taxation between individuals in
communities (so eliminating the tax advantages of being a company
relative to an everyday citizen).

\textbf{Case Study: Income and Corporation Tax: USA in the period
1945--1980}

The United States in the post-war years showed the advantage of
redistributive income taxation, including high tax rates on companies.
The top rate of income tax was often over 70\% in that period, and taxes
on companies were also higher than at present. Because everyone's
incomes were not as widely different, this not only meant that normal
people could afford consumer goods; it also meant that everyone had a
chance to buy a share of limited positional goods such as land. Since
the top rate of tax was high, and since income tax is the largest and
most important tax, this meant that the tax rate paid by people with
average earnings was lower. We discuss this is Parts 6 and 7.

\hypertarget{improvement-2-an-affordable-home-in-a-prosperous-community}{%
\subsection{\texorpdfstring{\emph{Improvement 2: An Affordable Home in a
Prosperous
Community}}{Improvement 2: An Affordable Home in a Prosperous Community}}\label{improvement-2-an-affordable-home-in-a-prosperous-community}}

The second priority is an affordable home for all. British governments
have massively mismanaged the taxation of housing and business
properties. By appropriately taxing the value of the location (land) in
a way that is convenient and fair for all, we can make it possible for
most people to enjoy the economic benefits of owning their own home. An
optimal tax system would encourage community action, so that `community
entrepreneurship' allows communities to develop their value and capture
the fruits of development improvements. How could we achieve this, given
how expensive homes already are in Southeast England?

The first priority is to capture location-rent increases that occur as a
result of public causes. What does this mean? This means that the
property taxes: Council taxes, business rates, and stamp duty, should be
rolled up into a single tax. This should be a tax on the value of land.
Another way to measure this is: It is a tax on property, with the value
of buildings deductible. A Land Value Tax could be payable in cash or
deferred until property-sale or death.

Taxing property values rather than property \emph{per se} would
stabilise current property values. Where land value increases, this
increase would be allocated between the local community, the municipal
authority, and the central government.

\textbf{Case Study: Land Value Capture in Singapore and Hong Kong since
independence}

Singapore has been termed the `property state' (Haila
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Haila2015}{2014}): Its example shows what is
possible when there is a `prosperity loop' between investment in public
infrastructure and public rent collection. In a nutshell: As the
government makes infrastructure improvements, those improvements
increase the rental value of the land. Those land value increases then
accrue to the government. Hong Kong also shows the advantages of this
approach. Before a new metro line is built, land near the new stations
is purchased at pre-announcement cost. When the metro station has been
built, the property value and rent will increase. In this way, society
captures the land value benefit of the new infrastructure {[}Purves{]}.
We discuss this in Part 8.

\hypertarget{improvement-3-a-prosperous-and-wealthy-country}{%
\subsection{\texorpdfstring{\emph{Improvement 3: A Prosperous and
Wealthy
Country}}{Improvement 3: A Prosperous and Wealthy Country}}\label{improvement-3-a-prosperous-and-wealthy-country}}

The third priority is a prosperous and wealthy country. The current
taxation system does not encourage productive wealth formation. In fact,
it encourages the sorts of companies that \emph{extract} wealth from the
country, and discourages those who want to invest productively and
regeneratively in society. A better system would encourage people who
invest in \emph{real assets}, but discourage purely financial
investment. In short, a good tax system encourages a balance of trade.

A good tax system discourages foreign investment in a financial sense
(speculation on paper assets) whilst encouraging investment in a real
sense (in building factories, for example). An optimal taxation system
would involve a collaboration between state and the private sector, so
the gains of research and development investment are shared between
both.

For this, we need to provide an incentive for companies like Dyson to
locate into the UK. We would simplify the corporation tax system so that
it is progressive, but allows real investment to be deductible. We
suggest the following: a \emph{higher} corporate tax but calculated as a
percentage of the following net quantity: Cashflow = UK Sales - UK Wages
- UK Investment.

In other words, the tax should \emph{encourage} UK companies to invest
in the UK. We call this a \emph{Dyson Tax}. Moreover, commercial banks
should be encouraged to lend to real-economy productive businesses.

\textbf{Case Study: Financial `Repression' in the UK in the period 1945
-- 1980}

One great anxiety is about \emph{debt}. There are basically two forms of
debt that concern people: public (or government) debt and private debt.
High public debt pressures governments to `cut the deficit' through
`austerity.' Yet in the past, the best way to reduce the burden of
public debt has been to not worry much about it - i.e.~to use different
strategies than cutting expenditures to reduce the debt-to-GDP ratio. In
the three decades after the Second World War, the UK reduced its public
debt to GDP ratio from over 250\% of GDP to 70\% of GDP. It did this not
through austerity, but rather through growth, inflation, monetisation of
some debt, and low interest rates. We consider the fiscal benefits of
such strategies later in this book.

\hypertarget{improvement-4-a-clean-and-safe-global-environment}{%
\subsection{\texorpdfstring{\emph{Improvement 4: A Clean and Safe Global
Environment}}{Improvement 4: A Clean and Safe Global Environment}}\label{improvement-4-a-clean-and-safe-global-environment}}

The final priority is the environment. There are a number of major
environmental problems facing us, most notably climate change and ocean
acidification, but also plastics in the ocean, habitat destruction, road
congestion, over-fishing, over-hunting, and conventional air, water, and
land pollution. Environmental taxes have a few challenges: they can be
unpopular, hard to design, encourage `off-shoring' of dirty forms of
industry, and bureaucratic.

Since demand for damaging products can be unresponsive to price, a high
environmental tax may be necessary. But high environmental taxes may be
unpopular, disruptive, or politically unrealistic.

Individual country actions are not enough. Instead, we need action that
is global. But there are no functioning global institutions. Thus, we
must look for solutions that can be implemented at a national level, yet
designed so as to encourage other countries to follow suit with similar
policies. Such solutions should fit within existing international
treaties and rules (e.g.~GATT).

Because protecting the environment is so important, the main priority is
not to raise additional revenue with this taxation source. Rather, it is
to ensure that the private sector has the correct incentives.
Accordingly, we propose a carbon tax. However, if we want people to
switch away from fossil fuels, there needs to be an alternative to them.
We achieve this with a tax on carbon inputs, complemented by a subsidy
on clean electricity production. Simultaneously, we also provide
low-cost loans from the public loan board. There will be prizes for
rapid roll-out of new clean technologies and national targets for the
roll-out of low-carbon electricity.

\textbf{Case Study: Environmental Taxes in Scandinavia, Switzerland and
the UK}

Three European countries show that a carbon tax can work exactly as
intended. Sweden, Switzerland, and the UK all have a carbon tax of some
description. Sweden was one of the first to introduce its carbon tax.
The per capita emissions of Sweden are now among the lowest in Europe.
Switzerland has also introduced such a tax. The UK introduced its
`carbon price floor' more recently, and it has seen a large fall in
emissions. Most notably, the UK has seen a drop in the use of coal in
electricity generation. Other environmental taxes include charges for
plastic bags, urban traffic congestion charges, and deposit return
schemes.

\hypertarget{conclusions}{%
\subsection{Conclusions}\label{conclusions}}

The central concern of the book is the use of the tax system for public
benefit. The challenge addressed is how to pay for public services and
social protection in a world characterised by `wicked externalities,'
`generalised rent,' and (as we will deal with later) international flows
of money and assets. We want to solve the critical challenges facing our
societies, including climate change, poverty, and the phenomena of
complexity, avoidance, and evasion in our taxation and welfare systems.

Our aim is to propose a system of taxes that are actively beneficial.
Good taxes would shape the profit motive towards the needs of people,
communities, and the living planet on which we all depend. We seek a tax
and social security system that is not only fair and practical, but also
beneficial to ordinary people, our country, and our world.

Because this book is about taxation and welfare in the context of the
real economy and the global environment, it inevitably overlaps with
other systems, including systems for providing energy, housing, and
finance. Our focus is mostly on taxation in relation to the problems
seen in these systems. Nevertheless, we do not intend to exclude
specific policy changes that are not related to taxation. Smart taxation
can make enormous contributions toward solving our social and
environmental problems, but it is not the only mechanism for so doing.

\newpage

\hypertarget{chapter-3-desert-island-economics}{%
\section{CHAPTER 3: DESERT ISLAND
ECONOMICS}\label{chapter-3-desert-island-economics}}

The purpose of this section is to take you on a whirlwind tour of some
important ideas in economics and the history of economic ideas. We shall
introduce these through stories set on a group of several islands, which
we will term the Economic Archipelago (the `Tea Islands'). In the
subsequent chapter we will introduce these same ideas more formally
using a different analogy: The cake.

\hypertarget{growth-on-great-island-adam-smiths-model}{%
\section{3.1 Growth on Great Island: Adam Smith's
Model}\label{growth-on-great-island-adam-smiths-model}}

In this economic fable, we will demonstrate Adam Smith's model of growth
through specialisation.

The largest island in the Tea Islands is called `Great Island.' On Great
Island live a few hundred people. Everyone does the same thing, which is
a bit of everything. Half the day is spent fishing (including
maintenance of the boats and nets), and the other half is spent
gathering nuts and berries. This yields 250g of fish and 250g of nuts
and berries per person per day. In total, 0.5kg of food is gathered,
which is exactly equal to their dietary needs.

\hypertarget{specialization-and-trade}{%
\subsection{Specialization and Trade}\label{specialization-and-trade}}

Then a small group of fishermen discover something. They decide firstly,
that they are \emph{only} going to fish, and no longer participate in
gathering berries. Whilst they like eating nuts and berries, they argue
that they can catch enough fish and \emph{trade} some of the fish they
gather with others for nuts and berries. They also split up tasks
between themselves. Some of them make nets, others build bigger boats.
They can catch more fish by splitting up tasks in this way. By
collaborating and specializing they can double their productivity.
Whereas before they could only make 500g of food per day, now they
collectively can produce 1kg of food per day per fisherman.

They now have some choices. The first option is to work all day (8
hours) and sell the surplus, either saving the excess or spending it on
some luxuries. The second option is to cut down working hours by working
only 4 hours per day. In the shorter working day they can still produce
enough food to live on. In both cases the fishermen in the firm have
higher hourly wages than before - twice what they were making before.
These higher wages reflect the higher productivity.

So the improvement was generated by the fishermen and their initiative,
and they are the beneficiaries of the new way of working. The economy
has grown, but at present the additional prosperity has gone entirely to
the fishermen who initiated the improved ways of working. The price of
fish relative to berries is unchanged. One kg of fish still sells for
one kg of berries.

\hypertarget{competition}{%
\subsection{Competition}\label{competition}}

At first, the benefits of improvements are captured by those that made
the improvement. They get to live a life of relative luxury. And
everyone else's material conditions are pretty much as they were before.
The rest of the island's population does notice, however, that those
fishermen who specialised seem to be getting richer.

Soon some other folks have observed and understood what the fisherman
have done. They follow suit, and adopt the new methods. And then even
more fishermen see what is going on and pile in as well. Fortunately the
seas are plentiful. Once each has replicated the new improved
double-productivity setup, they can all sell their surplus fish. But
something strange happens. Given the people only want to buy a certain
quantity of fish, the fishermen undercut each other in order to win
market share. The price of fish in terms of berries starts to fall.

\hypertarget{the-labour-theory-of-value}{%
\subsection{The Labour Theory of
Value}\label{the-labour-theory-of-value}}

To what price should the price of fish fall? It continues to fall until
the point at which, in the new circumstances, it only just makes sense
for workers to go fishing in the new fishing-conglomerates - i.e.~when
the wages from fishing in the new improved setup equilibrate to the
wages for going gathering. In other words, the price of fish relative to
berries will fall until it makes the same sense for someone to fish as
to go collecting berries. This assumes of course that there is still
value in eating some berries, perhaps for a varied diet.

So now, the cost of fishing is expected to fall. In these new, changed
circumstances, 1kg of fish (taking one day to collect) buys 0.5kg of
berries (also taking one day to collect). This is the new, cheaper price
of fish relative to berries.

\hypertarget{widely-shared-prosperity}{%
\subsection{Widely Shared Prosperity?}\label{widely-shared-prosperity}}

If we add some numbers, we can make the improvement clearer.

At the end, people fish for a day to get 1kg of fish and perhaps go
collecting for a day for 0.5 kg of berries. 2/3 of the people fish, and
1/3 of the people collect berries. This is a change from the fifty-fifty
split before the improvement in collective capabilities.

The total average food production is 2/3+1/6=5/6 or about 0.82kg. Thus
the real wages per day have increased, from 0.5kg per eight-hour working
day to 0.82kg of food per eight-hour day.

This is an example of the basic model of division of labour and
competition. Let's now extend this model to the situation in which there
is scarce land that is privately owned.

\hypertarget{rent-on-private-property-island}{%
\section{3.2 Rent on Private Property
Island}\label{rent-on-private-property-island}}

Our fisherman is considering a change of direction. He has heard that
there are two new islands, recently discovered, which seem paradisical.
Rabbits run free and are easy to hunt. Fishing is rather laborious;
hunting rabbits sounds much easier. Our fisherman sets out to visit the
first of the two new islands. The first island is one of private
property.

On this island, there is a man, let's call him `Man Friday,' living on
it. He has invented some laws of property. He defines himself the owner
of this island, and has armed himself to make sure that nobody else can
use any of the property without his permission. He prepares to charge
rent to anyone who turns up. We will call this island `Private Land
Island'.

Then a new man turns up, we can call him Robinson Crusoe. This man has
been living at sea in a fishing boat. Every day he fishes, he catches
1kg of fish, which we can assume are very nutritious.

Crusoe arrives at Private Land Island, which is full of rabbits that are
easy to hunt. If he works a whole 8-hour day, he can now catch 8kg of
rabbits. Let's say that a rabbit is just as nutritious as a fish, and
the work is just as pleasant. In fact, he only needs 1kg of food to live
on, so he can work one hour per day and relax the rest of the time,
perhaps by reading books on the division of labour.

After the second day of fruitful hunting, Man Friday turns up to say
hello. Fortunately, through a twist of fate, the two of them speak the
same language. Friday is very happy that Crusoe has turned up. He
invites Crusoe round to dinner. It's a very tasty dinner of
rabbit-en-croute. Friday has many beautiful items on the wall, won from
many years of selling rabbits to passing tradespeople. He even has a
beautiful gun, and halfway through the meal, he gets it out of his gun
holster, places it on the table to show it to Crusoe, and then puts it
back in its holster.

Dessert is served. Friday has a family of servants who help him. Friday
is saying how he is glad that Crusoe has joined the island. Half way
through the desert, Friday gets to the point. ``Oh, about the rent'' he
says. ``Would seven per day be ok?''

In that moment, Crusoe realises he has not been having a pleasant day
after all. He had not even considered that Friday would charge him rent.
There was space enough on the island for all. But Crusoe had few
options. The best profession he had found up to now, working as a
fisherman, earned 1 kg of food for a full day's work. Living on dry land
seemed attractive (at least he was not subject to the storms). He had
thought that he would be in a position to work only one hour per day
henceforward. But now he realised that his working hours would not
change. The eight-hour shift of fishing to get one unit of fish is the
same as the eight hours he would have to work to get eight kg of food in
the new situation, of which seven would go to his landlord! He would
still work the same hours, and get the same pay. Admittedly, the new
situation was a little better, as he was not subject to the storms and
salt-corrosion of his boat, but it was not the bliss that he previously
envisioned.

It's interesting to note that the net wage after rent of our new arrival
actually depends not on the conditions of the island, but rather on the
conditions in his next best option, which is to go fishing. Suppose that
fishing made 2kg of fish per 8 hour day (0.25 kg per hour). The
landlord, observing this, would need to charge at most 6kg of rabbit per
day in rent, since otherwise, Robinson Crusoe could always do better
fishing. This point is worth repeating: The well-being of someone in a
given situation depends on the options they have available elsewhere.

Thus we can see that the abolition of traditional peasant rights in
England during the Enclosure Acts were the fundamental cause of poverty
in big cities thereafter. Without the option of returning to the
countryside to be a peasant, workers had no Plan B, and were not in a
position to negotiate for better conditions in their urban environments.
Therefore the wages paid by industrial capitalists needed only be
sufficient to keep their wage-slaves alive, but no more -
i.e.~subsistence wages.

In economic terms, we say that the landlord can extract \emph{rent}
constituting the surplus over wages (in this case, the net resources
kept by Robinson once he has paid his rent).

\hypertarget{differential-rent}{%
\subsection{Differential Rent}\label{differential-rent}}

Imagine the island is split into two domains of differential rabbit
productivity. On one side of the island, rabbits are plentiful, and 8kg
of rabbits per day can be hunted. On the other side, rabbits are less
plentiful and only 4kg per day can be hunted. The landlord rents out
both plots, but the rent charged on each differs. Assume for now that
the wage a person can make is still 1kg per day when fishing. Thus the
landlord can charge 3kg of rabbits for residence on the less productive
plot and 7kg of rabbits per day for residence on the more productive
plot.

\hypertarget{absolute-rent}{%
\subsection{Absolute Rent}\label{absolute-rent}}

Let's say that for some reason, there's a series of storms the people on
the islands find it hard to catch fish. The landlords however have some
spare resource - stored dried food - that they have accumulated over
many years. They sell this food to the fishermen. In exchange the
fishermen sell their boats to the landlords and rent them back. Now
there is no rent-free way of earning a living. In this situation, land
and other ways of earning a living are absolutely scarce. They have been
bought up by the wealthy landlords.

How much of the landlord's revenue comes from renting out boats, versus
how much comes from seizing the surplus from land-based labour by
renting out hunting-rights to the rabbit hunters, will depend on the
abolute scarcity of land and also the absolute scarcity of labour.

We can consider two possibilities: the first is that there is a shortage
of workers. In this case, there will be some level of scarcity in
labour, and therefore wages will be kept up.

In our current scenario of abundant labour, of the original 8kg of
rabbits, only 1kg is retained by the hunter; the other seven are paid as
rent for access to the landlord's hunting-grounds. The residual wages
are not set at what the hunters can earn in a rent-free existence, but
rather, the minimum that will keep them alive.

In a scenario of scarce labour, this could change. This would require
that the labourers (in this case, rabbit-hunters) have a choice of
landlords to work for. If there are several islands with landlords and
rabbits, but too few rabbit-hunters available to hunt all the rabbits
produced by the islands, then the landlords will be forced to compete
for the time and effort of the hunters. In that case, the rabbit-hunters
might be able to negotiate a deal with a landlord in which they retain
two rabbits per day and pay the landlord only six rabbits (again
assuming the hunter is able to bag eight rabbits a day).

All this depends, of course, on the rate of rabbit-hunting remaining
sustainable; i.e.~the fecundity of the rabbits and the available rabbit
food on the islands must be such that the hunters' productivity of 8
killed rabbits per day doesn't overwhelm the ability of the rabbits to
regenerate their populations. And the rabbits' numbers mustn't get so
high that they eat all the available greenery and cause a mass
starvation. A dynamic equilibrium between rabbit population and the
population of hunters is what's best for all concerned.

\hypertarget{capital}{%
\subsection{Capital}\label{capital}}

Let's say that Robinson sets aside some of his wages, in order to save
for the future. He works for a bit and creates some rabbit traps. He has
to invest some time in making them, but once he has done so, his
productivity doubles from 1 rabbit per hour to two; or from 8 rabbits
per day to 16. It takes him one day to build the traps. The traps double
his daily productivity to 16 rabbits per day. We can say that it
increases his productivity by 8 rabbits. Each trap lasts 10 working days
(80 hours) before having to be completely replaced.

Does this investment make sense? Let's work it out. There's an
investment of 8 hours of time, and this leads to 8 extra rabbits per day
for 10 days. This is a total of 80 extra rabbits. I give up 8 rabbits in
one day to construct my trap, and I get back 80 rabbits. Let's say that
I borrow the resources to make the traps, so I borrow 8 rabbits to pay
the rent and feed myself during the day I make the traps.

Thus my profit is 72 rabbits (assuming I continue to work a full day)
each 10 day cycle. This is a profit of more than 7 rabbits per day, once
the cost of my investment is taken into account.

At last Robinson Crusoe is happy! He is a great believer in hard work.
He is working full days to pay the rent, and will continue to work full
days. He can invest his time and create the traps, and reap the reward.
After having paid back the time invested, there will be a surplus too!
He can sell the spare rabbits to passing tradespeople or to Man Friday,
and can build up assets.

We are assuming that Crusoe has some financial buffer, some wealth to
tide him over for the day that he is building his trap and therefore not
hunting. If rent is payable daily, he might be able to delay paying
rent, he might be able to borrow some rabbits or other resources to pay
rent, or he might invest his own stock of wealth until the investment
pays back. Everything is going swimmingly well. He invests his time and
he makes a surplus, and soon enough he's selling the spare rabbits to
passing tradespeople and building up a store of value.

But there's a catch. Friday comes round and observes what is going on.
He takes some photos. And soon enough, some adverts go up in the
Archipelago Gazette, the local newspaper for the islands. It's only
after getting a copy from a trader on a passing ship that Crusoe sees
them. The adverts say the following: Make a fortune hunting rabbits!
Earn 16 rabbits per day. He also reads the small print: requires 8
rabbits investment to make traps; rent: 14 rabbits per day.

14 Rabbits! He's only paying 7 at the moment! What's coming? Sure
enough, some visitors soon come around, friendly enough. The next day
Man Friday invites Crusoe round for dinner again\ldots{}. ``About the
rent''\ldots{} he says. ``I know you are enjoying staying here, but the
market is changing. Market rents are going up. I had an offer the other
day for someone to pay double what you are paying. Of course, I prefer
to go with you, since I know you're a good reliable chap, so I won't
chuck you out as long as you pay what the market is saying. It's only 16
rabbits per day. You still make a healthy 2 rabbits profit (actually one
after paying for your investments but let's skip that).''

Note that it seems that \emph{property} is the fundamental problem here.
But as we will see, abolishing property causes its own problems\ldots{}.

\hypertarget{overhunting-on-open-access-island}{%
\section{3.3 Overhunting on Open Access
Island}\label{overhunting-on-open-access-island}}

Let's now imagine another island. On this island, there are no property
rights. Anyone can hunt for rabbits anywhere. And like the island just
mentioned, there is no landowner! Word gets around, and everyone comes
to the island.

In the beginning, everyone is happy. Wages, 8 rabbits per day, or one
per hour, keep everyone in prosperity. The problem this time was that
too many people end up coming. Since the land is not owned by anyone,
everyone hunts rabbits, and in the end too many rabbits are taken from
the natural environment. The hunters soon deplete the common pool of
rabbits on which everyone had relied. There is an ecological collapse.
Soon there are few rabbits left. People have less food to eat. Those who
can leave do so, and move to other islands.

In contrast to the island with private property, people are poor, but
there's no abusive rent collection. The absence of property rights has,
however, caused a long-term impoverishment of the islanders, by causing
a failure to allocate and enforce hunting-rights at sustainable levels.
What we are learning through these scenarios is that the fair allocation
of property rights is the key for protecting the rights and prosperity
of the ordinary worker.

\hypertarget{inequality-on-special-island}{%
\section{3.4 Inequality on Special
Island}\label{inequality-on-special-island}}

Let's say now that hunters vary significantly in their skill level.
There's a limited quantity of land, and a limited quantity of rabbits.
But some people are much better than others at catching rabbits. Had
there been unlimited rabbits or unlimited land, this wouldn't appear to
be much of a problem. With limitations, however, there is a problem. The
successful hunters can afford to pay the landlord more tribute, and so
their existence increases the price of land. Moreover, they put pressure
on the rabbit population, harvesting more of the rabbits for themselves
and leaving fewer for others.

The control that `the landlord' imposed helps somewhat, by setting a
limit on the total number of hunters allowed on the land, facilitating a
process in which hunters compete to get rich by hunting ability rather
than by merely owning land. However, in a limited environment, good
hunters don't just benefit from their own hunting. They also indirectly
impose costs on others. They raise the marginal price of land, and so
make it more difficult for large families supported by rival hunters. As
more individuals hunt rabbits, the resource becomes more scarce.

This justifies what we call progressive taxation, to enable some degree
of redistribution to compensate for the costs to the community of a more
successful hunter. Progressive taxation means taxing people that have
larger incomes at a greater proportional rate than people who have
smaller incomes.

\hypertarget{economic-justice-on-dream-island}{%
\section{3.5 Economic Justice on Dream
Island}\label{economic-justice-on-dream-island}}

One of the islands on our archipelago is the island of our dreams. The
fruit is bountiful, the water is clean, the people are happy. Everyone
has a house or can build one with their own resources. Fisheries and
forests are managed well. Some people are richer than others, but the
difference isn't huge, and the people who are rich or high status are
those that have contributed the most to society - in other words,
rewards are proportional to \emph{contributive merit.} The community
collaborates to ensure that the political system is not corrupt and
governs the society well; the citizens trade with each other and with
people on other islands. There is work for all, but no-one has to work
uncomfortably long hours. The financial system supports beneficial
activities - for example clean power and a recharging system for
electric cars. Financially, people are secure; they have investments in
the local factory, which, whilst its mostly robotised, provides everyone
with a dividend to spend on the products that it and other factories
produce.

What has this fantasy island got to do with this text? A good tax
system, we claim, is the key tool towards achieving this heavenly island
state - together with reforms of the social security system and some
elements of the financial, education, and pensions systems. In this text
our focus is on tax system reforms.

Now what can be said about taxation on this perfect island? Well, in
simple terms, tax is fair, and fairly simple and straightforward for
everyone to understand. In important ways, the tax system supports the
rest of the economy - not only in through how revenues are spent, but
also in the ways that the tax system creates appropriate incentives for
the economy to function well, in accordance with public purposes as well
as private prosperity gained through genuine contributive merit. The two
main ways the taxation system can be used toward such ends are
\emph{redistributive taxes} and \emph{environmental taxes}. We will get
to our dream island again, but first, let's go back to the other islands
in our archipelago.

\hypertarget{getting-to-dream-island}{%
\subsection{Getting to Dream Island}\label{getting-to-dream-island}}

Let's now work out solutions to the problems we've encountered. It's
easiest to solve problems before they get started - to set things up
well from the start.

The first solution is a land value tax (LVT) - a tax on rent. With LVT,
a landlord is taxed according to the surplus of each piece of land. He
makes no unearned money. There's no such thing as a landlord any more,
really. Land can still be purchased, but the person who owns and
occupies it has to pay rent to the central authority. In other words,
rent (money collected from tenants in excess of the landlord's costs)
now accrues to the central authority, not to a private landlord. In our
island archipelago, the central authority might be a democratic council
elected on a one-person-one-vote basis.

What does the central authority do with the taxes received (in our
story: with the rabbits harvested)? There are two options: (1) The
government could provide public services by paying people living on the
island with rabbit-meat rations for doing useful things that benefit
everyone. (2) The government could distribute rabbit-meat directly to
the population, without requiring work in exchange.

What about over-hunting? A limited number of permits could be issued by
the central authority, with fines and penalties levied against those who
are caught ignoring the rules. Hunting rabbits could be constrained. Or
put another way, a tax could be levied on hunting rabbits. On propertied
land, it can be expected that the landowners/renters in charge of the
land will themselves look after the rabbits on their own plots. If
rabbits run freely between plots, there needs to be a joint solution
agreed between all the land-owners or set by the central authority that
constrains hunting.

\hypertarget{off-the-island-and-into-reality}{%
\section{3.6: Off the Island and into
Reality}\label{off-the-island-and-into-reality}}

What do these analogies mean for modern government policy on a large
island that harbours the lives of 65 million people? A multitude of
factors influence the functioning of the UK tax and welfare system, and
those factors interact to determine the impacts these controls have on
society. The following sections outline the key questions that policy
makers have to ask when designing and implementing taxes. We'll explore
the missing aspects in current policy design, issues in transitioning to
a new tax regime, and the reality of taxes as it stands today.

\newpage

\hypertarget{part-5-tax-in-principle}{%
\section{PART 5: TAX IN PRINCIPLE}\label{part-5-tax-in-principle}}

\hypertarget{why-tax}{%
\section{5-1: Why Tax?}\label{why-tax}}

It seems obvious that the authors of this book - \textbf{Tax Heaven} -
would be in favour of taxation. Taxes are, as we have argued in previous
chapters, a valuable method to pursue a variety of social objectives. In
fact, they are probably among the most important tools at the disposal
of governments, despite the negative press that surrounds their levy and
use.

It's time for a PR campaign. Death and taxes may be inevitable, but
taxes do not have to be seen as inevitably negative. The careful design
of tax regimes can minimise negative impacts, such as regressive levies,
poor behavioural incentives, or sophisticated evasion of taxes by those
who can afford specialist accountants. The importance of the tax regime
implementation and planning process can scarcely be overstated. Nor can
the importance of effectively communicating the intended purpose of tax
policy. The optics of policy design and implementation are key to
minimizing resistance and maximising success.

There are, of course, those for whom the very mention of taxes inflames
strong passions. These passions exist across the political spectrum.
Staunch libertarians claim that taxation is a blatant theft of private
property, while social democrats often consider taxation to be a moral
matter, an instrument for redressing unfair outcomes of the capitalist
ownership system. Emotions can run high in debates on the purposes of
taxation, and there often appears to be little common ground. This can
make discussions of the philosophical basis of taxation somewhat
fraught.

A precondition for successful policy design is a comprehensive
understanding of the purposes of the policy in question. In the case of
taxation, we must begin by addressing the following questions: Why do we
need to tax; what is it that we are proposing to tax; and what do we
hope to achieve? It's helpful when trying to communicate the purposes of
a new tax to try to answer these questions both in relation to taxation
in a broad sense, and to the individual policy itself. To what target
and at what level do we set the tax; to whom do the proceeds go; and
what behaviours are affected by its application? It is only when these
questions have been fully considered that effective tax policy can be
created.

In this chapter, we will outline our principles for effective tax
design, standing on the shoulders of giants in the field of economic
theory to develop the logic of our ideas. Ensuring that the policies we
create fulfil the requirements of being \emph{practical, beneficial and
fair} is also a priority of our work; this is something on which we will
expand further along.

\hypertarget{why-do-we-need-tax}{%
\subsection{Why Do We Need Tax?}\label{why-do-we-need-tax}}

The first question to address is why we should tax at all. Taxes are
traditionally unpopular policies, often seen by the public as a `tax
grab' on private assets and wealth. So let's give an overview of the key
positives that taxation policies can have.

The simplest answer to this question is that tax is imposed in order to
fund public spending. Government spending usually takes the form of
investments in public infrastructure, or on social provisions like
housing, healthcare, and public education. Investment in these public
goods is often economical only on a large scale -- it's not often that
one individual can be responsible for a public park, for example, or for
a university. The pooling of resources allows for these public goods to
be supplied to a cross-section of society that would otherwise be unable
to access them.

It's worth noting that the provision of public goods does not come
exclusively from government sources. Artists, writers, community
activists, and philanthropists can all be said to provide public
services. Cafés which offer public restrooms, private enterprises which
fund local newspapers, non-government cooperative agencies and
institutions such as charities all provide public goods and services.
However, the benefit of governmental provision lies in its ability to
prioritise and maintain these services through democratic decision
making, rather than relying on private benefactors.

But why doesn't the government just print money to pay for these goods?
The reasons include legitimacy and inflation. Money is effectively a
transferable IOU of value from the institution that has issued it
(generally a bank). In other words, money is a scorekeeping system for
keeping track of promises to deliver a specified quantity of value (a
specified number of British pounds). If the government prints and spends
a great deal of money without subsequently taking money back out of
circulation, too many £-denominated IOUs will end up in circulation, and
the legitimacy of these promises will become compromised. People will
stop believing that all these promises to deliver value will be
fulfilled, and will begin demanding more points in the game of
circulating £-denominated IOUs for any given amount of work delivered in
exchange. A rabbit might cost £20 instead of £10.

Put more simply, if the government printed money and put it into
circulation through spending on an excessive scale, and failed to remove
some of the money already in circulation by harvesting taxes to offset
new spending, this would cause inflation which would devalue the
currency already in circulation. This can lead, in extreme cases, to
hyperinflation and fiscal chaos, whereby money loses its worth, making
it increasingly difficult for people using the government's designated
currency to pay for their private consumer goods or other obligations.
This would also limit the ability of the government to invest in public
goods and assets. Without a solid basis of assets, a public body is
unable to guarantee that it will be able to deliver services to the
public on a long-term basis. This is why tax revenue is so important.

In addition to taxation, there are several other ways in which a
government can raise revenue. However, taxation revenue is one of the
core methods of supplying a government with the necessary funds for its
activities. This is in line with Beveridge's principles of levying taxes
as part of a comprehensive policy package of funding ongoing public
services.

As noted, an additional reason for taxation is to maintain fiscal order
and control inflation. The difference between tax revenue and government
spending is a major factor in a nation's economic growth and inflation
paradigm. This is not a focal point of our analysis in this text.
However, the macroeconomic influence of the public spending balance, and
the size of its deficit, is widely seen to be important. Governments
must manage their cumulative debt-to-GDP for reasons of international
credibility in support of appropriate exchange rates with other nations'
currencies.

Yet the difference between tax revenues and government spending does not
in itself constrain the government's ability to source financing for
public projects, or the extent to which fiscal policy can be used to
boost a national economy after a recession. At the end of the day, a
government that owns its own currency system and has a central bank is a
government that need never worry about being able to fund projects or
budgets. The real constraint on public spending is simply the
availability of idle resources - i.e.~qualified people available to be
employed - and not, in fact, any limit on the amount of money available
to a government. The government can always create any amount of money it
might need to fund investments or programmes, and it can also always
levy taxes in amounts it deems appropriate to rebalance the stocks and
flows of money and debt within different sectors of the national economy
(albeit within practical limits of political feasibility).

Another reason for using taxation is to emphasise the `social contract'
between a citizenry and their government. This is effectively a `deal'
by which the government is contracted to enact the aims and goals of
those they represent. Taxation can be thought of as a method of
enforcement of these designated responsibilities. It is, admittedly, not
always the case that this is explicitly recognised by members of a
government, but the `I pay for your salary' argument can go far when
shoring up a citizen's right to complain or to lobby for the specific
actions of a representative body. In nations whose governments are
funded mostly by sales of natural resources, not by tax revenues
(petrostates like Saudi Arabia or Venezuela are examples), governments
become distributors of unearned largesse rather than accountable
representatives of the citizenry; this generally has pernicious
political and economic results.

By establishing a stakeholder-shareholder model in which governments are
servant representatives of the people who pay for the governors'
services with their tax contributions, we change the status of the
citizen in society to that of co-proprietor, as well indirect
decisionmaker (through the medium of elected representatives). The
citizenry thus becomes the collective sovereign as well as the natural
recipient of any `dividends' from natural wealth. In this worldview, we
also change the status of the private landowner to that of a consumer of
national resources (through temporary occupation of a patch of the
sovereign's land), rather than an outright sovereign owner. The shift in
dynamics if this outlook is adopted may have considerable impacts on
future resource management in the UK.

As already touched on, there are also several social objectives that can
be achieved with the careful implementation of taxation. Redistributive
policies are a large component of public spending, sharing the wealth
that is created in a society through income, housing, and healthcare
provisions. Another reason that taxation can be useful is to correct for
monopoly pricing and externalities, or to change behaviour in some way
that is designated as socially beneficial. Behavioural economists have
only very recently started to explore the nudging and norm-changing
effects of taxation. Their ideas will be explored later in this chapter.

Of course, noble objectives remain mere concepts until they are
realised. In the world of policy, it is sometimes best to think of noble
goals as akin to `spectres' that haunt the messy reality of designing
and implementing policy. In this, we draw from Derrida's ideas of the
influence of justice in law -- never actually achievable, but rather
existing as an influencing ideal that pushes the development of law
(Glendinning \protect\hyperlink{ref-Glendinning2016}{2016}). The same
can be said for the objectives of taxation. The ability of taxation
regimes to tackle inequality and social bads will only ever be as good
as the reality of such policies as they are implemented in practice. We
will expand on this later - for now, we want to draw attention to the
significance both of the influencing ideas and also their
implementation.

\hypertarget{deciding-what-to-tax}{%
\subsection{Deciding What to Tax}\label{deciding-what-to-tax}}

Taxes can be applied to a range of goods and services. We will, going
forward, term these targets as the `tax base.' These can cover a very
wide range, e.g.~duties on imports, taxes on profits, taxes on incomes
over some threshold, or consumption taxes, e.g.~on luxury expenditures
whose demand is insensitive to price, or on `bads' such as tobacco
products.

Deciding which tax base to use can often be determined by the objective
of the policy. In the current system, raising revenue is predominantly
achieved through income taxes. This helps redistribute aggregate
economic income from those with high incomes to those with low incomes.
Taxes can also be applied to the unearned increment on scarce resources
that are limited in supply or monopolised - for example, land, fossil
fuels, or endangered fish. And taxes can help disincentivise
environmental and health bads - activities that damage our common
resources or our health.

Overall, we could tax four different types of activities:

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\item
\begin{verbatim}
Rents: Land, property, resources.
\end{verbatim}
\item
\begin{verbatim}
Finance: Money balances, bank balance sheets, transactions.
\end{verbatim}
\item
\begin{verbatim}
Environmental Health and Social Damage: Fossil fuels, greenhouse gas emissions, alcohol, tobacco, sugar, salt.
\end{verbatim}
\item
\begin{verbatim}
Cash Flow: Income, profit, capital gains, value added (sales tax).
\end{verbatim}
\end{enumerate}

But how do we decide which tax base to use? One solution is to create a
decision framework based on selected principles of justice and benefit.
We define these as the preconditions of practicality, benefit, and
fairness. The questions we can ask ourselves to build this decision
framework will help shape the ultimate design of the tax policy and the
schedule of assets that we decide to tax.

The first order of deciding the tax base should be efficiency. We can
ask the question of whether the private value of a good reflects its
social value. Where private value is greater than social value, taxes
can be levied to drive these two values to equivalence. If there is a
need for more revenue after taxing this value difference, we could then
continue to prioritise efficiency by taxing things that are fixed in
supply. Such a mechanism would avoid the distortionary incentives that
taxation levied on income or wealth can have.

We could also choose to select a tax base on grounds of equity. By
focusing on tackling private value inflation, we would begin to reduce
the rate of growth of inequality in the UK (Piketty
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Piketty2014a}{2014}) by reducing the windfall
gains associated with returns on capital and wealth, as opposed to
income. In doing so, we could enhance justice in the system. However,
care must be taken to ensure that existing asset values are not changed
so dramatically as to cause injustice during the transition process. One
way in which to achieve this is by focusing asset value taxes on future
increases in private value above the social value, rather than on the
existing allocations.

\hypertarget{what-are-the-objectives-of-reform}{%
\subsection{What are the Objectives of
Reform?}\label{what-are-the-objectives-of-reform}}

It seems clear that what we choose to tax, and at what level, depends on
the purpose of the tax itself.

If the goal is to reduce inequality, then taxes can be applied to
private assets and high incomes. Such taxes target the accumulation of
wealth to both recapture societal contributions to its formation, and to
ensure inequality does not grow excessively. Some argue that these taxes
must be designed to target oligarchic and monopolistic control of
assets. We define \emph{Oligarchy} as `rule by the few,' specifically by
the rich, where disproportionate power is held by a small number of
wealthy people who control the majority of a nation's assets. Assets can
often be synonymous with political power, leading to a society based
primarily on the principle of `one pound, one vote' rather than `one
person, one vote.' Oligarchic groups can gain a distortive influence on
the tax code so that it better suits their interests. This poses
problems for the majority.

Another area where the tax system could potentially be used to benefit
society is with environmental protection. Environmental taxes can help
to ensure that the global environment is less damaged by our economic
activities. Pollution is often considered a negative environmental
externality. It's good for society to internalise these costs, and
thereby incentivise producers to reduce them, by adding a cost to the
producers of `negative externalities' in the form of a tax; this is an
example of taxing `bads' to disincentivise their production.

It is not just in the levying of the tax that this mechanism can be
beneficial. It's possible to arrange financial flows from taxes on
`bads' such that the beneficiaries of the tax (those who benefit from
spending of the revenues raised) directly correspond with the stated
social aims behind the tax policy. This can bring a `double dividend' of
impact. For example, taxing polluting fuels and using the revenues to
subsidise clean energy could potentially accelerate the development and
implementation of clean energy provision in a country. Moreover, if a
tax looks to have regressive impacts (i.e.~hits the poorest in society
at a disproportionate level - consumption taxes and heating-fuel taxes
can have this effect), some of the revenues from such a tax could be
given as a rebate to those most negatively affected to ensure that the
policy retains political viability, as well as a broadly positive
impact. We see this in the form of modern welfare benefits in the UK,
despite the well-publicised problems in the system. These will be
explored in a later chapter which explores the history and functionality
of the UK welfare system.

\hypertarget{historical-perspectives}{%
\section{5-2 Historical perspectives}\label{historical-perspectives}}

Economic theorists have spent a lot of effort considering what an ideal
tax system should look like and how the practical application of its
principles could function. Adam Smith is perhaps the most celebrated
early economist to have considered this subject. He postulated that
there were four axioms of taxation, which were that taxes should be
\emph{convenient, objective, low cost} both in terms of the direct costs
of their administration and the discouragement they cause to others, and
that they should be \emph{levied proportionally to an individual's
ability to pay.} In his own words, in 1776 Smith
(\protect\hyperlink{ref-smith1776wealth}{1776}, Book V, Chapter I)
argued that:

``Good taxes meet four major criteria. They are (1) proportionate to
incomes or abilities to pay (2) certain rather than arbitrary (3)
payable at times and in ways convenient to the taxpayers and (4) cheap
to administer and collect.''

A tax on land rents is also mentioned by Smith as an example of a
particularly good tax policy instrument. He wrote:

``Both ground-rents and the ordinary rent of land are a species of
revenue which the owner, in many cases, enjoys without any care or
attention of his own. Though a part of this revenue should be taken from
him in order to defray the expenses of the state, no discouragement will
thereby be given to any sort of industry. The annual produce of the land
and labour of the society, the real wealth of the great body of the
people, might be the same after such a tax as before. Ground rents and
the ordinary rent of land are, therefore, perhaps, the species of
revenue which can best bear to have a peculiar tax upon them.''

David Ricardo (\protect\hyperlink{ref-ricardo1821principles}{1821}),
Henry George (\protect\hyperlink{ref-George1879}{1879}), John Stewart
Mill (\protect\hyperlink{ref-mill1848principles}{1848}), and Alfred
Marshall (\protect\hyperlink{ref-marshall1890principles}{1890}) have
likewise argued for the advantages of taxing land rent. Developing this
concept, Ricardo put together a model of different land qualities and
their respective qualities and rents. He recommended a tax on
landowners' rent income to ensure fair management of the limited land
resources in the UK. Henry George also recommended a tax on land rent,
extending Ricardo's reasoning to urban land. He noted that the
speculators always win, at the expense of everyday people, if land
values are not regulated through taxation. Frank Ramsey
(\protect\hyperlink{ref-Ramsey1927}{1927}) extended the argument to
commodities in general, developing a formula for optimal taxation such
that those commodities most inelastic in supply or in demand should be
taxed the most. His work argued for the inverse elasticity rule: The
amount of taxation payable on a commodity should be proportional to the
sum of the reciprocal of the demand and supply elasticity for that good.

Arthur Cecil Pigou (\protect\hyperlink{ref-Pigou1924}{1924}) developed
the idea of taxing negative externalities. These externalities can be
defined as situations in which an economic activity damages actors who
are external to the transaction concerned. A pertinent example would be
pollution. The \emph{polluter pays principle} has now become a major
part of environmental policy theory, with major institutions like the
IPCC and the World Bank arguing for the importance of a carbon tax in
managing global emissions. Closer to home, political institutions such
as the Green Fiscal Commission in the UK have recommended carbon taxes
as a way to reduce environmental bads. These findings are similar to
those of the Mirrlees review, and indeed the Government currently
applies a `carbon price floor' as a method by which to achieve this.

On wealth and inequality, there is a substantial body of work on the
impact that taxation can have. Keynes' Polish contemporary, Kalecki,
argued that taxation of wealth would increase effective demand and
therefore economic growth without stifling incentives (Kalecki
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Kalecki1937}{1937}). And more recently Piketty
(\protect\hyperlink{ref-Piketty2014a}{2014}) has shown the consequences
for continual growth in inequality if wealth and high income are
\emph{not} sufficiently taxed.

There have also been several contemporary reports into taxation in
practice. The postwar UK was among the pioneers of what was to become
the basis of the modern welfare state. Beveridge's comprehensive plan
for a `cradle-to-grave' tax and welfare system was ground-breaking in
its day, with its proposal to use progressive income taxation to pay for
the amelioration of the five great evils he identified. More recent tax
policy proposal updates in the UK have included the Meade Review on
direct taxation (Meade \protect\hyperlink{ref-Meade1977}{1977}) and the
Mirrlees Review into taxation (J. A. Mirrlees et al.
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Mirrlees2010d}{2010}), (Mirrlees et al.
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Mirrlees2011}{2011}). The former recommended a
cash-flow taxation system of taxing consumption, findings which were
echoed by the Mirrlees study. This study found that applying a deduction
for the normal cost of capital could achieve comparable results,
alongside a raft of other land-based taxes (such as a land value tax or
proportional property tax) to replace business rates and/or council tax.
There have been similar reviews in Canada (Carter et al.
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Carter1966}{1966}), the United States, (Bradford
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Bradford1977}{1977}) and, more recently, in
Australia (Henry \protect\hyperlink{ref-Henry2010}{2010}) and New
Zealand (Evans \protect\hyperlink{ref-evans2011reflections}{2011}).

Standing on the shoulders of these giants, we can derive two general
principles. First, the allocation of capital needs to account for the
total costs and benefits to society, rather than just to the private
profit of an individual. This involves a rethink of what property rights
actually entail, and will enable taxes to be used to enact broader
social aims. Using taxation to internalise the \emph{externalities} that
result from economic action will therefore ensure that assessements of
an action's total benefits and costs are incorporated into economic
decision making, which in turn will combat the inefficiencies and market
failures associated with allowing these to persist.

Secondly, the importance of distributed ownership of and returns from
assets becomes clear. Any taxes that are implemented should prioritise
the minimisation of any inequalities that might result. This, in turn,
means using taxation and regulation to manage the ability of an economic
actor to assume monopolistic control over private assets and to accrue
unearned \emph{economic rent}. If we convert this into economic
language, we can say that the priorities for any taxation system should
be to focus on taxing \emph{externalities and rents.}

\hypertarget{principles-for-taxation}{%
\section{5-3 Principles for Taxation}\label{principles-for-taxation}}

In our introduction, we discussed the core questions that must be
answered if taxes are to be used effectively. In the popular
imagination, informed by frequent articles published in newspapers owned
by billionaires with anti-tax agendas, taxes are characterised as an
inevitability, a necessary evil, and a yearly burden, rather than being
understood as an important tool for social progress. As the old saying
goes - there is nothing so certain in life as death and taxes.

But, even if we assume that taxes are a necessary evil, then we must
establish some guiding principles on how they should be applied. If we
accept the idea that taxes should be focused on the two broad economic
aims of taxing economic rent and externalities, then the next step
becomes to establish \emph{how} exactly tax policies should be designed
to do so. Key considerations include the political acceptability of the
policies, and the careful design of their implementation and structure
to minimise any unwanted and unanticipated impacts.

By doing so, we create a framework that serves to sense-check the
policies that have been put forward. As our starting point, we have
chosen three core characteristics which we suggest all taxes should
possess. These are that taxes should be \emph{beneficial},
\emph{practical}, and \emph{fair}.

In other words, we are prioritising any new policies being without harm,
just, and functionable. Clear and easy-to-understand language is
important to avoid people getting fed-up with policy-wonk language and
tuning out. For this purpose, we will walk through the expanded
definitions of these criteria below.

\hypertarget{beneficial-not-harmful}{%
\subsection{Beneficial (Not Harmful)}\label{beneficial-not-harmful}}

To be beneficial is to do good overall. There are multiple ways in which
different taxes might be said to `do good,' and people may reasonably
disagree on what `good' means. However, all taxes must have some
legitimate claim to be beneficial. Most would agree that a tax is
beneficial if it pays for valued public services. For example, taxation
that pays for our National Health Service, our emergency services, our
roads, schools, and public transport, is generally considered necessary
and beneficial. This is evidenced by a recent survey of British citizens
(PWC \protect\hyperlink{ref-PWC2017}{2017}) which found that the
majority would be willing to pay more tax if it leads to improvements in
the quality of the NHS.

More contentiously, taxation may be said to be doing good by
redistributing income (or at least ensuring that the rich contribute
more), helping to alleviate poverty, and reducing large wealth
disparities. The proceeds of taxation may be also used to ensure a
minimum standard of living by providing an income `safety net.' This is
evident in countries which have adopted the `welfare state' ideology,
whereby taxes levied on income are used to create a cushion for those at
the lower income spectrum.

As we've noted, taxes can also be used to discourage antisocial and
harmful behaviour by individuals and companies. They may do this by
compelling those who cause harm to society through their economic
activity to pay for that harm.

\hypertarget{fair-just}{%
\subsection{Fair (Just)}\label{fair-just}}

There are three ways in which we think taxes must be fair. Taxes must
demonstrate consistency, progressivity, and transitional justice.

As seems obvious, the first condition is that taxes must be fair by
being consistent. Similar persons, companies and situations should be
treated identically. There should be no special exemptions or
`sweetheart deals' for favoured individuals or companies. This seems
obvious. In practice however, this principle is often flouted, usually
to the advantage of powerful companies or individuals.

Related to this idea of fairness are concepts of accountability and
transparency. Taxes must not just \emph{be} fair but must be
\emph{perceived to be} fair. Taxes should therefore be clear and
transparent, such that it is apparent to everyone what the proper tax
burden should be for each income bracket. These issues are particularly
topical in Britain today. In early 2017, the Parliamentary Public
Accounts Committee expressed concern that HMRC's ``lack of
transparency'' concerning high net worth individuals ``has eroded public
trust in a fair tax system.'' (Committee of Public Accounts
\protect\hyperlink{ref-HoC2017}{2017})

Another, perhaps more controversial kind of fairness concerns
\emph{progressivity}. A progressive tax is a tax in which those who have
more, pay more. UK income tax is thus a progressive tax regime, since
richer citizens pay more proportionally than poorer citizens. We think
this is fair - however, this viewpoint is not uncontroversial in some
quarters.

Fairness is also relevant to our discussion of economic rents and land
values. When land values increase because of work performed by society
as a whole, by our definition, it would be fair if all citizens benefit.
It would seem unfair for only some few people to benefit. Similarly, it
would seem unfair if only a few people benefited from the country's
natural resources - resources which were not created by any person, but
which form part of the nation's unearned endowment.

Finally, it is important to achieve fairness during the transition from
the existing system to the new system. This is necessary not only for
reasons of justice, but also for the political feasibility of reforms:
If their transitional consequences are seen as unfair, they will be
unpopular, and subject to defeat or reversal.

\hypertarget{practical-smoothly-functioning}{%
\subsection{Practical (Smoothly
functioning)}\label{practical-smoothly-functioning}}

If a tax was fair and intended to do good, but couldn't be implemented
without requiring masses of paperwork, prohibitive costs, or extreme
social controls, then no matter the benefit, the tax would not be
justifiable. Taxes must be practical to implement.

When considering whether a tax is practical, we might consider how close
it is to a theoretical ideal. Ideally, a tax should be simple to
implement and administer. It should have low collection and compliance
costs. This means that it should not cost the government huge sums to
collect, and it should also be simple for taxpayers to comply. The less
paperwork, time-consuming research, and confusing rules are involved,
the better. Taxes which are automatically collected are more practical
in this regard than those which require excessive amounts of
form-filling and record-keeping.

One pertinent drawback from overcomplication of tax policy is tax
evasion. This has been a particularly hot topic in recent years. There
is a difference between tax avoidance and evasion. Tax avoidance is the
\emph{legal} dodging of tax; tax evasion is the \emph{illegal} dodging
of tax. A tax which is easily evadable or avoidable is impractical,
because it will not function to increase public revenues. It may also
require significant resources to be wasted chasing up non-complying `tax
cheats.' Moreover, it's important to avoid an international `race to the
bottom' where countries compete to reduce tax rates on companies and the
super-rich. Ensuring that taxes are as intelligently and efficiently
designed as possible, within a holistic policy package, will help to
reduce this risk.

Another aspect of practicality is predictability. Individuals and
companies must be able to predict future expenses in order to manage
their financial planning. In a similar vein, taxes must be clearly
defined, so that taxpayers can plan their affairs while knowing exactly
how much tax they can expect to pay. This emphasises the need for steady
transitions and well communicated policies when applying any policy
change.

\hypertarget{principles-for-welfare}{%
\section{5-4 Principles for Welfare}\label{principles-for-welfare}}

Let's take another look at the public services to which spending raised
from tax revenues are allocated. The most significant of these, outside
of healthcare, is welfare. The modern welfare state, conceived by
Beveridge in 1942, looks to protect individuals `from cradle to grave'
(Beveridge \protect\hyperlink{ref-Beveridge1942}{1942}) by
redistributing income from taxation to those who are most in need.

We can define three key functional requirements of the welfare system as
follows:

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\tightlist
\item
  To provide a `safety net' to ensure that everyone is guaranteed a
  minimum standard of living, regardless of their personal circumstances
  or earning potential.
\item
  To ensure that people with specific needs (e.g.~the disabled and their
  carers) have sufficient resources to support themselves.
\item
  To pay a state pension to those over state retirement age.
\end{enumerate}

That there are a number of secondary and tertiary benefits to this,
including creating a stable political environment by managing
inequality, providing education and healthcare to increase the labour
quality of the UK economy, and a sense of community or national
solidarity associated with the citizenry's pride in being willing and
able to look after the weakest in society.

The UK's comprehensive system empowers low income and unemployed workers
by providing them with education and a minimum standard of subsistence
by which they can move back into the labour force when they are ready.
Where the system fails is in not doing enought to encourage and channel
workers into productive and fulfilling roles, or in protecting those at
the bottom against social censure. Other social security systems manage
these issues differently, and manage to avoid the common criticisms that
plague commentary around the UK welfare system.

\hypertarget{a-framework-for-reform}{%
\section{5-5 A Framework for Reform}\label{a-framework-for-reform}}

\hypertarget{principles-in-practice}{%
\subsection{Principles in practice}\label{principles-in-practice}}

How shall we think about these principles in a practical sense? As
mentioned above, ideals remain mere dreams until they are successfully
realised. Practicality, benefit and fairness become ideals to aim at
when designing any new tax policy, without becoming restrictive
principles which limit the development of any policy. The perfect should
not become the enemy of the good.

No system will be perfect, but the strategic design of any new policies
to prioritise clearly defined purposes and visible benefits sits at the
heart of success. Incorporating this insight into a framework for
guiding reform is our final task in this chapter.

So, what does all this mean for our new tax system? Having discussed
historical ideas of \emph{what} we should tax, outlined practical
considerations for \emph{why} we should tax, and touched on the
\emph{guiding principles} that should lie behind the design of any new
policy, the clearest takeaway is that there is a lot to consider! It's
no wonder taxation has a bad reputation. The complexity of designing a
successful policy results from the sheer number of considerations that
must be made to try to achieve the multiple goals of raising revenue,
tackling social norms, managing monopoly, and preserving equality, all
while keeping things sufficiently simple and so circumventing a
Kafkaesque bureaucratic nightmare scenario.

We can find our way out of this maze. By rearranging and summarising the
above into a clearer decision-tree format, we can begin to pull together
the threads of a decision framework that we can use to link taxation in
principle with taxation in practice.

It's clear from the foregoing that consideration of taxes can be
subdivided into establishing the objectives and targets of the policy,
and the guiding characteristics of the policy design itself. In our
framework, we term these distinctions as the functional and qualitative
requirements of the tax system. We outline these below.

\hypertarget{functional-requirements-of-tax-and-welfare-system}{%
\subsection{Functional Requirements of Tax and Welfare
System}\label{functional-requirements-of-tax-and-welfare-system}}

In simple terms, three major functions of the tax and welfare system can
be identified:

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\tightlist
\item
  Raise Revenue: (Pay for government services)
\item
  Ration Scarce Factors and Economic Bads: (Share limited resources,
  minimise environmental and health harm, and ensure the economy
  develops beneficially)
\item
  Correct Maldistribution: (Redistribute income fairly, provide a safety
  net for those in need; help people into work; and ensure that the
  distribution of income is equitable)
\end{enumerate}

\hypertarget{qualitative-requirements-of-taxation-system}{%
\subsection{Qualitative Requirements of Taxation
System}\label{qualitative-requirements-of-taxation-system}}

Similarly, we can identify three main non-functional requirements:

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\tightlist
\item
  Useable: (Simple, with clear justification, objectives and low
  compliance and collection costs)
\item
  Economically Efficient: (Non-distortive, applied to a secure tax base,
  and with low capacity to evade/avoid)
\item
  Equitable: (Transparent, fair, and internationally cooperative)
\end{enumerate}

\hypertarget{qualitative-requirements-of-welfare-system}{%
\subsection{Qualitative Requirements of Welfare
System}\label{qualitative-requirements-of-welfare-system}}

We can also apply a similar mindset to the use of tax revenue in the
case of the welfare system.

A welfare system should be:

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\tightlist
\item
  Useable: (Simple, integrated, value for money, with the use of modern
  technology)
\item
  Efficient: (Providing incentives for going to work, and for skills
  development)
\item
  Equitable: (Fair, without stigma)
\end{enumerate}

\hypertarget{theory-of-change}{%
\subsection{Theory Of Change}\label{theory-of-change}}

How do we change the tax system? We need to maximise the effect whilst
minimising resistance to changes. This is true in two areas in
particular: Environmental/energy policy and housing policy. If we want
to have a big effect, we need a big incentive. We must use financial
incentives to promote forms of entrepreneurship which will provide
public benefit. But big changes tend to have big losers, and therefore
suffer strong political resistance.

What can individuals and groups do to promote a better tax and welfare
system? Economic justice campaigners seek to eliminate the evident
unfairness of the current taxation and benefits system. Environmental
and housing tax campaigners seek to use the tax system to make the
private sector work for greater public good. Simplicity campaigners seek
a simpler, more usable system. Tax Heaven proposes to combine these
motivations to propose a fair, beneficial, and simple tax and social
security system. It provides a rallying point for key ideas that could
be implemented immediately.

\hypertarget{tax-theories-of-change}{%
\subsection{Tax Theories of Change}\label{tax-theories-of-change}}

How do we change a complex, entrenched system like the UK's tax regime?
This book deals with tax reform with two distinct approaches. The first
is a `blank slate' approach. This considers how we would define a tax
and welfare system in an ideal world where both efficiency and fairness
are achieved easily.

The second approach takes into account issues of incremental improvement
and transition. In other words, what practical politically feasible
changes could be made right now to make the system more beneficial and
fair?

So what does practicality look like? Often in policy, it is synonymous
with political feasibility. Previously, we mentioned the idea of
political realism and transitional justice. Changes must not seem
unfair; nor must they have obvious losers. Fairness will be often
perceived to be a matter of \emph{transition} as opposed to the sort of
a perspective we might have when trying to create a tax system from a
`blank state' (as we do within this book).

The tax system seems to change through top-down directives, through the
intervention of the chancellor of the exchequer of the moment. This
approach means that the tax system often changes with the agenda of
`budget day' announcements. Of course, the secrecy around these
announcements is to a degree necessary: If agents know how the tax
system is going to change, then they may be able to take steps to avoid
taxes. A better approach might be to conduct a strategic tax review, in
a similar way to the regular strategic defence review.

Any discussion of taxation and welfare needs to consider \emph{political
realism}. What is political realism? It's a recognition that some
policies are politically easier to implement than others. In the context
of taxation and welfare, we need to consider \emph{transitional justice}
and in particular not make any major groups worse off (except those that
had previously benefitted unfairly - though they too will rage mightily
against any changes). So, for example, it might be argued that a 100\%
land value tax is appropriate in certain locations, but to impose such a
tax immediately would be unfair to people who had recently purchased a
house in a high land value area.

So what would it take to make change happen? Arguably we need:

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\tightlist
\item
  Political desire for change - i.e.~a broad public consensus that there
  is a wrong that needs to be righted
\item
  A shared narrative understanding of the principles on which any new
  plan might be based
\item
  Clear and easily communicated proposals that people could rally around
\item
  Effective communication of the reform plan
\item
  A political opportunity
\item
  People ready to take advantage of this opportunity when it does arise.
\end{enumerate}

How do we create that narrative understanding? Well, this book is a
contribution to it. It is crucial to build a narrative that works for
everyone in society, and caters to the different ways that people live
in the world and contribute to economic life.

We must awaken to the story we have been told about how the economy
works, and understand its profound problems. We must see the evidence of
the consequences of the existing system, and realise that there are
alternatives. We must start to tell a new story.

\hypertarget{previous-frameworks-and-guidelines-for-successful-reform}{%
\subsection{Previous Frameworks and Guidelines for Successful
Reform}\label{previous-frameworks-and-guidelines-for-successful-reform}}

According to Bird and Oldman,
(\protect\hyperlink{ref-BirdAndOldman}{1990}) there are eleven main
aspects that need to be considered for a successful tax reform. In this
section, we take Bird and Oldman's categories and re-specify them for
this particular book, in the order that they are covered here:

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\tightlist
\item
  \emph{Taxation theory}: Taxing rent and externalities, taking account
  of the theory of optimal taxation (both its classical formulation and
  recent additions).\\
\item
  \emph{Macroeconomic situation}: Balance of payments, trade deficit.\\
\item
  \emph{Attractiveness of proposals to politicians and voters}: A reform
  should be attractive to voters and to specific types of politician.
  There should also be feasible policy pathways toward achieving the
  reform.
\item
  \emph{Political realities}: Interests of voter groups, popular notions
  of justice, interests of powerful groups.
\item
  \emph{Institutional inertia}: Proposals for overcoming this.\\
\item
  \emph{Administrative realities}: Assess the existing tax system and
  propose reforms to make taxes easily calculable, and levying them as
  simple and automatic as possible.\\
\item
  \emph{Empirical evidence}, for example: effect of incentives at work;
  interaction between work, experience, education, and salary; effect of
  environmental taxes on damage; effect of health taxes on health
  outcomes; effect of taxes on finance.\\
\item
  \emph{Robustness to changing times}: We look at the changing nature of
  work, and consider the dynamic effects of our tax proposals.
\item
  Local knowledge*: Legal nature of tax system; specific problems of UK
  system tax and economy (regional balances, dysfunctional house
  prices).\\
\item
  \emph{Produce beneficial results:} Our modelling chapter will attempt
  to assess the likely consequences of the reforms we propose.
\end{enumerate}

\hypertarget{feasibility-of-proposals}{%
\subsection{\texorpdfstring{\textbf{Feasibility of
proposals}}{Feasibility of proposals}}\label{feasibility-of-proposals}}

Malcolm Torry, in his recent book `The feasibility of citizen's income'
(Torry \protect\hyperlink{ref-Torry2016}{2016}), considers the
desirability of an unconditional \emph{per capita} payment to all
citizens, and then distinguishes between, and analyses, seven different
types of `feasibility':

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\tightlist
\item
  Fiscal
\item
  Household financial
\item
  Psychological
\item
  Administrative
\item
  Behavioural
\item
  Political
\item
  Policy process
\end{enumerate}

We cover these notions of feasibility in our evaluation of these
proposals in chapter 14.

\hypertarget{principles-of-transition}{%
\section{Principles of Transition}\label{principles-of-transition}}

\hypertarget{transition}{%
\subsection{Transition}\label{transition}}

Any new tax system will involve a transition from the existing to the
new. Working out such a transition is as important as working out where
the direction of a tax system should eventually go. Such a transition
should be fair and politically feasible, and also it should demonstrate
the viability of the policies implemented by proving to a sceptical
public their value. In order to transition from the current system to
one that works more effectively in a fashion that is smooth and
politically feasible, we set out some suggestions on principles of
transition.

\#\# Principle 1: Visionary

The desired state and the objectives of the move should be clear.

\hypertarget{principle-2-packaged-change}{%
\subsection{Principle 2: Packaged
Change}\label{principle-2-packaged-change}}

The change in the tax system should be packaged into a policy proposal
that can be implemented in the current political system.

\hypertarget{principle-3-political-feasibility-rhetorical}{%
\subsection{Principle 3: Political Feasibility:
Rhetorical}\label{principle-3-political-feasibility-rhetorical}}

The change should be expressible in simple and compelling arguments.

\hypertarget{principle-4-political-feasibility-few-losers}{%
\subsection{Principle 4: Political Feasibility: Few
Losers}\label{principle-4-political-feasibility-few-losers}}

The change should create few losers, in other words, significant, well
organized groups should not lose out. If there are losers, then those
losers should be disarmed by the rhetorical purpose of the policy, and
where necessary by appropriate transitional compensation.

\hypertarget{principle-5-expert-assent}{%
\subsection{Principle 5: Expert
Assent}\label{principle-5-expert-assent}}

The change should have experts willing to support it. These experts
should be credible and authoritative.

\hypertarget{summary}{%
\subsection{Summary}\label{summary}}

The following table shows both the final strategic objective and the
intermediate/transitional one.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}lll@{}}
\toprule
\begin{minipage}[b]{0.20\columnwidth}\raggedright
\textbf{Policy Area}\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{0.36\columnwidth}\raggedright
\textbf{Initial, Intermediate Approach}\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{0.36\columnwidth}\raggedright
\textbf{Final Objective}\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.20\columnwidth}\raggedright
Income Tax\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.36\columnwidth}\raggedright
Simplify rates structure, make existing benefits universal and add in
means testing using tax system instead of benefits means testing.\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.36\columnwidth}\raggedright
Income tax is only paid by the upper half of individuals\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.20\columnwidth}\raggedright
VAT\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.36\columnwidth}\raggedright
Remove Exemptions, SImplify\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.36\columnwidth}\raggedright
Transition to a profits tax based on UK sales\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.20\columnwidth}\raggedright
Carbon Tax\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.36\columnwidth}\raggedright
A system that gives general incentives based on a high implicit carbon
price that does not raise significant revenue\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.36\columnwidth}\raggedright
A high carbon tax used for general revenue\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.20\columnwidth}\raggedright
Money Balance Tax\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.36\columnwidth}\raggedright
No change from existing system\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.36\columnwidth}\raggedright
Electronic deposits are taxed at approximately 5\% per annum with a
significant tax free personal allowance. Cash are registered and are
time limited and a small fees are paid on withdraw\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.20\columnwidth}\raggedright
Citizen's Dividend\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.36\columnwidth}\raggedright
Use existing benefit rates that simplify the system and reduce
conditionality.\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.36\columnwidth}\raggedright
In the long term, build up a personal sovereign wealth fund to pay
individuals are larger citizen's dividend\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.20\columnwidth}\raggedright
Guaranteed Training and Employment\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.36\columnwidth}\raggedright
Short term, high quality master craftsman level courses for specific
groups to optimize the system\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.36\columnwidth}\raggedright
Long term, rolling out the guaranteed training to all sections of the
population\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.20\columnwidth}\raggedright
\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.36\columnwidth}\raggedright
\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.36\columnwidth}\raggedright
\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

\hypertarget{paths-forward}{%
\subsection{Paths forward}\label{paths-forward}}

Taxes and benefits create incentives for good or ill. It is crucial that
these incentives are well-aligned with the interests of society as a
whole. An improved tax and welfare system should include the functional
and qualitative characteristics described above to promote total wealth
in society. A well-designed system would reconcile the seemingly
competing objectives of equity and efficiency with a minimum of
compromise. Effective communication and steady implementation could also
satisfy political objectives through clearly demonstrating the economic,
social, or environmental objectives that a policy was designed to
achieve.

The summary table below outlines what we think are the general
characteristics of an \emph{ideal} tax system:

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}lll@{}}
\toprule
\begin{minipage}[b]{0.20\columnwidth}\raggedright
\textbf{General Characteristic}\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{0.47\columnwidth}\raggedright
\textbf{Function}\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{0.24\columnwidth}\raggedright
\textbf{Qualitative Requirement}\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.20\columnwidth}\raggedright
\emph{Practical}\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.47\columnwidth}\raggedright
Raise Resources for Government Services (MMT: Validate Money);\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.24\columnwidth}\raggedright
Useable; Low Cost; Simple\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.20\columnwidth}\raggedright
\emph{Beneficial}\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.47\columnwidth}\raggedright
Ration Scarce Collective Resources and Bads; Macroeconomic
Management\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.24\columnwidth}\raggedright
Economically Efficient\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.20\columnwidth}\raggedright
\emph{Fair}\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.47\columnwidth}\raggedright
Distribute Collective Rents Fairly; Correct for Maldistribution of
Income and Wealth\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.24\columnwidth}\raggedright
Equitable\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

By using this framework, we can more clearly evaluate past tax policy
and design new tax policy with a view to promoting equity and
efficiency. This framework of principles is, we suggest, a useful
evaluatory criterium for strategic tax reform.

However, it is not enough to have strong principles behind the design of
tax policy. We emphasise the idea that tax is in strong need of a PR
campaign.

One element of this could consist in clearly tying outputs from the
spending of tax revenue to the purpose that they are intended to tackle.
This, for example, could be using revenue from a carbon tax to act as a
`green investment' funding source.

Another could be in proposing a shareholder-stakeholder model of
society. By asking the question of who exactly the stakeholders and
shareholders are in society. and who should receive the `dividends' from
different forms of wealth, the path may be opened to more fundamental
change in the UK tax system.

It will also be useful to highlight success stories from other countries
and constituencies, where tax policy has been received positively by the
communities it affects. In our next chapter, we will explore these ideas
of implementation and functionality, as we move on to how these
principles are applied in practice.

\newpage

\hypertarget{part-6-tax-in-practice}{%
\section{PART 6: TAX IN PRACTICE}\label{part-6-tax-in-practice}}

\hypertarget{the-existing-tax-system}{%
\section{6.1: The Existing Tax System}\label{the-existing-tax-system}}

Okay. So, we understand that it's important for taxes to be well
designed. We understand that they should be applied strategically, to
tax bases that are not disproportionately impacted by their
implementation. They should be efficient; they should be fair; and most
of all, they should be part of a system that provides the greatest
amount of benefit possible from the revenue raised.

We also established that the core purposes of taxation could be reduced
to three streams: revenue-raising, behaviour-influencing, and fairly
redistributing rents and income across the population. That taxes could
be useful in achieving these goals is a theory that economists and
political theorists alike have ascribed to.

But is this the reality in the UK today? With one of the oldest
tax-and-welfare systems in the world, and well-established norms that
facilitate its implementation, it would appear that the UK should be in
a good position to translate these principles into successful practice.
Is that where we are in reality?

In this chapter we take on this question by analysing the existing
taxation system. We look at how it operates in practice, and show the
significance of the perspectives laid out in the last chapter. After
taking a look at each of the tax system's characteristics in turn, we'll
be able to evaluate the current condition of taxation in the UK.

We'll also look at the ways in which taxes fail. As our framework
suggests, simplicity and practicality are core components of any
successful taxation system. When large-scale evasion or avoidance
occurs, this is a failure of the system. We therefore describe how taxes
are routinely avoided in the UK; by clearly outlining the methods by
which evasion and avoidance occur, we hope to create a tool for citizens
and the policy-makers alike to hold evaders and avoiders accountable.

Taking a systemic perspective of the UK tax and welfare system can be
helpful in determining where its pressure points lie. Tax and welfare
are two sides of the same policy coin. One side cannot be fully analysed
or appreciated without the other. Although our later chapters on
inequality cover the UK welfare system in more detail, here we take a
step back and look at these policy tools holistically, gauging the
overall levels of spending and assessing the current benefits system.

\hypertarget{revenue-and-reasons}{%
\section{6.2 Revenue and reasons}\label{revenue-and-reasons}}

\hypertarget{tax-in-practice}{%
\subsection{Tax in Practice}\label{tax-in-practice}}

The UK tax system consists of approximately 26 different taxes,
exploiting many tax bases. In total, £594 Billion was received by the
HMRC in 2017/18 (HMRC
\protect\hyperlink{ref-HMRC2019}{2019}\protect\hyperlink{ref-HMRC2019}{a}).
With national GDP in 2018 recorded as £2.033 trillion (ONS
\protect\hyperlink{ref-ONS2019}{2019}), this translates to an overall
tax burden of 29.2\%. Of this, income taxes made up £180 billion,
national insurance contributions £131 billion, and VAT £125 billion.
This demonstrates how concentrated the UK's tax base is, with over 73\%
of total receipts raised from these three taxes.

A diminishing number of taxpayers are responsible for paying the bulk of
income tax. According to Full Fact, the top 1\% of earners were
responsible for 28\% of overall income tax revenues (fact
\protect\hyperlink{ref-FullFact2019}{2019}). This number is relevant
when it comes to the perspective of those designing tax policies.
Retaining an attractive enough tax environment for top earners is a core
priority of government tax bodies and is one of the more important
considerations behind `practicality' considerations in this space. A top
tax rate of 100\% may be attractive to some enthusiastic tweeters, but
is, in reality, impractical. Policymakers must balance a desire to raise
money or combat inequality using tax rate increases on high incomes
against creating incentives for tax evasion or avoidance and capital
flight.

Overall, the proportions of total tax receipts received by HMRC in the
UK has remained mostly stable since the 1980s (HMRC
\protect\hyperlink{ref-HMRC2019}{2019}\protect\hyperlink{ref-HMRC2019}{a}).
The key changes of note have been the increased revenues contributed by
indirect taxes, and the growing importance of consumption taxes,
especially the value-added tax (VAT).

The wide range of tax bases has, however, remained, making the UK tax
codes one of the most complex in the world. The UK tax code is now 12
times the size of the King James Bible, itself not exactly a nightstand
novella. The tax code stood at 22,000 pages on last measurement (Martin
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Martin}{2016}). This is due in part to the Tax
Re-write Project, which converted previously archaic and disorganised
laws into plain, comprehensible English. Indeed, complexity and length
can be negatively correlated. The `shorter' US tax system is often
thought of as more complex than that of the UK. However, it remains the
case that the burden of administration and interpretation is still
heavy, and there is substantial political support for simplification of
the tax code.

This complexity also has consequences for HMRC itself. It is the
second-largest government department in terms of staff numbers. The
administrative cost of running this organisation is substantial, running
at £3.3 billion in 2016-17 (NAO \protect\hyperlink{ref-NAO2017}{2017}).

Part of the reason behind the complexity is the range of purposes which
taxes are intended to achieve. Raising revenue for government spending
is clearly the primary objective of VAT, income tax, and national
insurance contributions. Carbon and environmental taxes are meant to
change behaviour and regulate pollution. And the levels of child tax
credits, income allowance, and housing provision are examples of the
goal of redistributing income in the UK.

As it stands, the tax system already makes a substantial contribution to
these three goals. Taxes pay for the majority of government spending;
taxes already redistribute income significantly; and taxes on activities
that are harmful to the environment and to health have been levied to
discourage those activities.

However, the tax system is not the only way to achieve these outcomes.
Public services could be funded by issuing bonds or imposing user
charges. Regulation to ensure high quality, readily accessible
education, the strong protection of workers' rights, and changes to
property rights could also help to lower inequality. As for behavioural
incentives, education and exortation could be highly influential in
reducing unhealthy behaviours, with legal prohibitions applied to those
bads which are seen to be overwhelmingly harmful. Environmental
objectives could also be achieved through government investment and
stringent regulation, rather than market-based instruments.

This is most clear when the tax system fails to generate the outcomes
targeted. Some objectives are too important to leave to the market,
especially when it comes to regulating social and environmental bads.
Moreover, relying on tax revenue can be difficult when the system is as
complex as it currently is. Increased complexity raises the risks of tax
avoidance and evasion by the wealthiest of earners.

\hypertarget{welfare-in-practice}{%
\section{Welfare in Practice}\label{welfare-in-practice}}

But what about the flipside? As we've touched on already, the objectives
of Beveridge's welfare state were to create a comprehensive system that
employed tax revenue, government policy, and moral authority to tackle
the five great evils in society. Today, this is achieved through the
welfare system. Allocating funds to people of diminished capacity,
low-income citizens, and the elderly creates a safety net, a minimum
standard of living that people can count on\ldots{} in theory.

According to the Office for Budgetary Responsibility, the UK public
sector is estimated to have spent £771 billion in 2016-17. Within that,
around £484 billion was allocated to the `welfare state.' Here, we
define the `welfare state' broadly to include ``health, education,
social services and housing, as well as social security and tax
credits''(Office for Budget Responsibility
\protect\hyperlink{ref-OBR2018}{2018}). The rest of the spending was on
the military and on servicing the public debt.

Of the money allocated to the welfare state, some £217 billion was spent
on social security and tax credit spending - i.e.~some 28\% of total
public spending in that fiscal year (Office for Budget Responsibility
\protect\hyperlink{ref-OBR2018}{2018}). That amounts to about £8000 paid
out per UK household.

In fact, the UK welfare system is so comprehensive that at some point in
an individual's life, they will most likely receive some form of
payments from the state. These are most commonly in the form of child
tax credits or child benefit, and state pension payments during
retirement age. Over half of families in the UK receive income from one
or more welfare payments in the system, with the majority of these
payments (59\%) going towards pension obligations. Together with
personal tax credits, mainly targeting families with dependents, and
housing benefit, these three areas combine to make around two-thirds of
total welfare spending. Job seekers' allowance, despite its infamous
status, made up only 1\% of the total spend on social security
provisions in total. The figure below expands on this spending.

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics{ChapterPictures/5-1-taxrev.png}
\caption{5-1-taxrev}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics{ChapterPictures/5-2-taxage.png}
\caption{5-2-taxage}
\end{figure}

As the figure above shows, the largest single slice of the expenditure
on welfare is directed towards people in retirement, sitting at 40\% of
total revenue. Despite recent policy changes to raise the retirement age
in light of an aging population, this portion of welfare is set to
increase. The rest is divided amongst those on disability and incapacity
benefit, families, and low-income people. These benefits are either on a
contributory basis, i.e.~pension payments that are dependent on National
Insurance contributions, or non-contributory, such as the basic state
pension. These benefits can be awarded on a means-tested basis,
i.e.~housing benefit, or be universally applicable, like universal
credit.

As we outlined in the previous chapter, there are three key purposes to
the UK benefits system: To provide a safety net for all individuals at
the bottom of the economic system; to care for people with special
needs; and to protect individuals into old age with a state pension.

There are obviously flaws in the reality of achieving these goals, some
of which will be expanded on in our inequality chapter. We can summarise
by boiling these down to (i) administrative costs and errors and (ii)
issues with inequality and delivery. Food-bank use in the UK rose 13\%
in the 2017-18 period alone, following a 6\% increase the year
previously (The Trussell Trust
\protect\hyperlink{ref-TheTrussellTrust2019}{2019}). This is due in part
to rising costs of living, and in part to administrative issues having
to do with the rollout of universal credit, which has left many people
behind in their payment schedule. This too will be expanded on in more
detail in the chapter on inequality, but for now, it's important to
recognise that there are issues in the implementation of these welfare
ideals in practice.

\#6.2 Bugs in the System

\#\#Identifying the issues

There are several problems with the UK tax and benefit system as it
stands today. These are issues that we can categorise into a few groups
as follows: administrative and compliance barriers, tax avoidance and
evasion, and public acceptance of taxes.

A broad complaint about the tax system is its complexity. The
over-complexity of the UK tax system has led to high administrative and
collection costs, as well as a number of unwanted consequences around
progressivity. It has also allowed an extensive number of exemptions and
loopholes to arise in the system. These can be described as government
expenditures, masked as tax rebates. They complicate the system and most
of them should be removed.

Moreover, it could be said that despite its length, the system lacks
ambition. As it stands, the tax system doesn't take sufficient advantage
of opportunities to change consumer behaviour. Only about one-sixth of
existing tax revenue is raised from taxes which are aimed at behavioural
change. Given the potential for taxation to create behavioural norms and
effect social change, this is a missed opportunity.

\hypertarget{administrative-issues}{%
\subsection{Administrative Issues}\label{administrative-issues}}

The complexity of the current tax system is made worse by the number of
loopholes, exemptions, and tax-credits that it offers on a variety of
different criteria. It is difficult for the non-specialist citizen to
comprehend the full extent of the tax system as it stands. Many employ
professional services like accountants and lawyers to deal with its
details. Clearly, citizens cannot hold politicians to account when they
don't understand the system. Politically influential groups can gain a
great deal of influence in shaping the tax code without citizens ever
becoming aware of it.

It is also difficult for the government to administer the policies. HMRC
is one of the largest government departments, costing over \$3bn
annually to run. Its administrators face huge challenges in monitoring
and enforcing a tax system which covers over 65 million individuals,
with over 26 taxes applied on direct and indirect tax bases, using what
is often a manual data-management process.

Moreover, due to its complexity, there are several interplays between
different taxes - and these interplays can distort behaviour in an
economically inefficient way. The entire existence of `tax advice' firms
shows that there are economic resources engaged in avoiding tax instead
of producing goods and services, with a net loss of value to society.

The issues that surround implementation are offshoots of the system's
complexity. Unintended consequences of taxes can arise from weak
communication and poor implementation of new policies.

\hypertarget{public-acceptance}{%
\subsection{Public acceptance}\label{public-acceptance}}

The perceptions of tax as an inevitable evil aren't helpful for its
implementation. Fears of government tax grabs and regressive impacts can
mean that even policies that appear well-designed in principle can fail
in practice. It is important to consider the communication strategy
during the implementation process, and to explain the public purposes
for which revenues raised from taxes are spent.

A paper published by Demos, a cross-party think tank, suggests a number
of ways that taxes can be designed to make them more politically
acceptable. An overriding comment is that voters and citizens are
increasingly wary of bureaucratic `black holes' of spending - an issue
that came to light in the MP expenses scandal over the last decade.
Finding that taxpayers' money had been frittered onto, amongst other
things, expensive duck-houses for MPs was a factor in decreasing the
perceived legitimacy of government tax revenue. As the authors describe,
``Government appears as a black hole into which resources disappear.''
(Mulgan and Murray \protect\hyperlink{ref-Mulgan1993}{1993}) This paper
sets out three mechanisms by which taxes can be made palatable to a
voting public.

Firstly, taxes should be `hypothecated,' i.e.~taxes can be clearly
linked to the specific public goods provision enabled by revenues
raised. We can see this in the case of carbon-tax theory, which a number
of studies have examined to determine the most politically viable
avenues for allocation of these new revenues. A recent study by the
Oxford Martin School found that how the design of carbon pricing reforms
incorporated this issue was directly linked to their longer-term success
(Our World in Data \protect\hyperlink{ref-OurWorldinData2018}{2018}). An
overarching finding was that the visibility of the spending enabled by
revenues was a key factor, which could materialise in the form of green
infrastructure investments, tax rebates, and consumer subsidies, or even
direct transfers to households. The latter methods have the benefit of
tackling the potentially regressive impacts of carbon taxes, which are
consumption-based and therefore tend to hit poorer households harder
than richer consumers.

`Regressive' means that the burden of the tax falls proportionately
harder on the poor than on the prosperous. With consumption taxes, even
though the latter may be paying more in absolute terms, as a percentage
of disposable income, the poor pay more. Taxes like VAT, National
Insurance, Vehicle Excise Duty, and council tax fall under this
category. British Columbia is an example of success in this respect,
having directly rebated households with the proceeds from their nascent
carbon taxation scheme. Public acceptance rates of this scheme have thus
been maintained. Compare this to the poorly communicated fuel levy
placed in France towards the end of 2018 and the resultant `Gilet Jaune'
protests, and the importance of clear communication about the purposes
to which a tax policy is put become clear.

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics{ChapterPictures/5-3-taxtrust.png}
\caption{5-3-taxtrust}
\end{figure}

The figure above correlates the height, or price, of carbon prices in
governments with public trust in government and politicians. Carbon tax
rates are positively correlated with trust in politicians, and
negatively correlated with perceptions of corruption (Our World in Data
\protect\hyperlink{ref-OurWorldinData2018}{2018}).

The second recommendation from Demos' paper was that voters ``should
have more influence on spending choices\ldots{} spending should be
decided by referendums'' (Mulgan and Murray
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Mulgan1993}{1993}). This is potentially a way to
bypass allegations of corruption and low public trust. However, the
administrative cost of such a system is significant.

Thirdly, local spending should be tied to local taxes, so that high
levels of visibility can be maintained for local voters. Councils should
be allowed to determine local spending to an extent that is agreed on by
their electorates. This feeling of buy-in is not only important on the
lower income levels of UK society, as we shall explore in the next
section on tax avoidance. Citizen buy-in is an important factor for
ensuring sustainability within the system.

\hypertarget{tax-avoidance-strategies}{%
\subsection{Tax avoidance strategies}\label{tax-avoidance-strategies}}

As Theresa May said in 2017, ``Taxes are the price we pay for living in
a civilised society.'' (Houlder
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Houlder2017}{2017}) Speaking in the wake of the
tax avoidance scandal that implicated a number of well-known
celebrities, including Jimmy Carr and Bono, the Prime Minister spoke for
a cross-party majority when she attacked those who evaded and avoided
tax. However, given the large number of reliefs, loopholes, and rebates
that continue to exist in the over-complex system we have, it's
difficult to say whether her concern was genuine or feigned.

As it stands, HMRC relies on self-reported income, and could therefore
be termed an honesty scheme. There are regular check-ups, used to
incentivise people into truthfully reporting their income. However, the
sheer scale of the enterprise, combined with the ability for wealthier
individuals to use complex taxation schemes, means that the
administrative body is often playing catch-up in enforcing these
regulations. The system's loopholes encourage avoidance, and HMRC has
not, until recently, strongly punished evasion. Richer individuals and
companies are incentivised to pay advisers to avoid tax legally (or even
illegally). Large companies can take advantage of variations in tax
treatments between different countries (`tax arbitrages'). It must be
admitted that changes in a single country's tax policies cannot prevent
this alone. However, simplification of the UK tax system could at least
enhance transparency for officials and the public, aiding in identifying
those entities which engage in tax arbitrage practices.

HMRC has started to tackle tax avoidance more strongly in recent years,
with ``tough new legislation and demands that they pay disputed tax up
front.'' (Houlder \protect\hyperlink{ref-Houlder2017}{2017}) Recent
prosecutions and stricter controls have closed off many of the avenues
that were once commonplace for large multinationals and wealthier
individuals. The world of tax evasion and avoidance is smaller, and
mostly plays closer to the letter of the law -- layering the available
relief schemes available from the government. Yet tax-saving ploys
remain available that allow and encourage high-net-worth individuals to
reduce their tax liabilities.

Knowledge is power - not least when it comes to tax avoidance and
evasion. It therefore seems relevant to outline the most common methods
of tax avoidance and evasion that high-net-worth individuals engage in.
The HMRC itself regularly publishes a breakdown of the tax evasion and
avoidance strategies which it is aware of. (HMRC
\protect\hyperlink{ref-HMRC2018b}{2018})

Following this, we can see that these strategies include:

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi})}
\tightlist
\item
  Tax Havens
\item
  Shell companies
\item
  Equity swaps
\item
  Avoiding capital gains tax
\item
  Evading estate tax/inheritance tax
\item
  Shell trust funds
\item
  Incorporating
\item
  Payments in kind
\item
  Life insurance borrowing
\item
  Real estate borrowing
\end{enumerate}

We will not be able to tackle every accounting problem. Our approach is
twofold: - a much simpler system of income tax with fewer marginal rates
and fewer taxes (with the aim to eliminate the separate
benefits-means-testing system, employers and employees National
Insurance, and yet retain a system of tax contribution records) - some
totally new taxes (such as a land value tax and and upstream carbon
taxes) that be designed well to start with.

In other words we follow Einstein who suggested: `make it as simple as
possible, but no simpler'.

\hypertarget{conclusions-1}{%
\section{6.3 Conclusions}\label{conclusions-1}}

It is clear from the foregoing that the UK's existing taxation and
benefits system does not operate in practice in the way it is meant to
in principle. The system has failed to effectively enforce behavioural
taxes on a wide and mobile tax base.

Accordingly, it's important to draw out some recommendations for how
policy makers should adapt the tax system to fix these implementation
issues. Communication, clarity, and enforcement are all aspects of this
transition.

What is taxed should be concrete and objective. It should not depend on
the honesty of those declaring the tax, and it should not penalize the
honest relative to the dishonest. The tax system should not contain `tax
arbitrages', and should not allow for dishonesty. This would help to
combat the issues of public acceptance and administrative complexity.

The costs and time-commitment of administering the system should never
be excessive. Streamlining the tax code to simplify the number of tax
rates, directly tying benefits to the purposes of taxes that are
applied, and severely limiting the number of exemptions should be among
the steps taken. Above all, the tax and benefit system should be capable
of being easily understood by the public.

In terms of public acceptance, the purposes and targets of taxes should
be well communicated and clear. As outlined in the previous chapter,
following clear principles when taxes are created, so that they are
practical, beneficial, and fair, is essential to ensure that they will
be successfully launched. Tax should either fall on things that
\emph{don't go away} when we tax them (e.g.~land) or things that we
\emph{want to have go away} when we tax them (e.g.~fossil fuel use, or
excessive sugar consumption).

It is important to our everyday lives that the tax and benefit system
works well. As we've shown, income tax and consumption tax revenues are
the lifeblood of public services like the NHS, the educational system,
and social security.

There is buy-in on the welfare side. Most individuals in this country
will benefit from a public payment of some kind, from healthcare to
child benefit to the state pension, within their lifetimes. Creating the
same level of connection with the taxation system is an essential
component of the system's public acceptance and sustainability.

The key mechanisms by which the UK raises revenue, redistributes income,
incentivises corporations and nudges individuals towards choices in the
public interest, have been neglected and left to rust, out-of-step with
the times we live in. There is no shortage of popular support for
reform. Indeed, consensus seems to be on the side of the need for
improving and simplifying the current tax and welfare system.

As we will explore in coming chapters in more detail, things are
changing, but not enough. Proposals put in place that aim to move
towards the Universal Credit system have ignored the need for the
changes to be practical, beneficial, and fair. HMRC's attempts to reduce
tax evasion have yet to do much to solve the problem. And destructive
behaviours, especially by corporations, have yet to be effectively
targeted through the use of taxation. There is still a long way to go to
implement our high principles in practice.

\newpage

\hypertarget{chapter-7-welfare-and-work}{%
\section{CHAPTER 7: WELFARE AND WORK}\label{chapter-7-welfare-and-work}}

\hypertarget{summary-1}{%
\subsection{Summary}\label{summary-1}}

\begin{itemize}
\item
  Work plays a major role in modern life, yet it can be difficult to
  define precisely. Work can be purposeful and fulfilling (work as
  leisure) or it can be unsatisfying drudgery (work as toil).
\item
  Work can be of benefit to society (e.g.~nursing), or it can be harmful
  (e.g.~creating advertisements for junk-food). Benefit and harm are
  often not reflected in salaries.
\item
  In the UK, there has been a decrease in unemployment, but proportional
  growth in low income, low-skilled and insecure work. There has been an
  increase in people relying on tax credits to top up their wages.
\item
  Many people feel overqualified and dissatisfied with their work. There
  has been an increase in the numbers of people working excessively long
  hours (NB: I don't know if this is true, workhouses?). This is
  associated with increased rates of heart disease, mental illness,
  diabetes, and stroke.
\item
  There is a relationship between the labour market and welfare. When
  work is precarious, there is a need for unemployment benefits to plug
  the gaps. Illness from overwork may lead to a need for Employment and
  Support Allowance or disability payment.
\item
  The current British welfare system is unsuitable for the needs of
  today's workforce.
\item
  The current system discourages people from transitioning into work.
  There is also a stigma associated with receiving benefits,
  contributing to a non-take up of benefit by people who are entitled to
  it. Administrative delays and assessment mistakes are also rife.
\item
  Any new welfare system should: be flexible, avoid disruptions in
  income, be empowering, promote work-life balance, be non-stigmatising,
  simple, avoid benefits trap, be modern, and sufficient to live on.
\item
  Citizens Income would meet many - though not all - of the above
  requirements. It is an income, unconditionally granted to all, on an
  individual basis, without means test or work requirement.
\item
  Guaranteed Jobs and Skills training could be used to improve the skill
  level of people in deprived communities. A successful program would
  help people discover what work people would like to do, and would be
  targeted towards skills needed by employers.
\end{itemize}

\begin{quote}
\emph{``I think there's a lot of pressure in this country to work when
you have kids, and I don't think that's true of everywhere.You think of
somewhere like Germany, when you are at home with your kids that's OK,
but here there's pressure all the time to be out working''} `Laurie,'
single parent
\end{quote}

\begin{quote}
\emph{``I also just feel that bringing up a child is working! Why is
that not given the status?''} `Ray', single parent.
\end{quote}

\begin{quote}
\emph{``I have a job with a really flexible employer, but I do get
called up at short notice and it's incredibly stressful.''} `Martina'
\end{quote}

\begin{quote}
\emph{``If you are on a zero-hour contract, you are already not going to
be earning much, so how do you pay for childcare to cover those times?
It's not unreasonable for people to have some kind of predictability in
the workplace.''} `Keira'
\end{quote}

\hypertarget{what-is-work}{%
\section{7.1 What is Work?}\label{what-is-work}}

\emph{``We shall honour those who can teach us how to pluck the lilies
of the field who toil not, neither do they spin''} (Keynes
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Keynes1930}{1930})

\newthought{Those words were written}in 1930 by John Maynard Keynes, the
eminent economist, in an essay entitled Economic Possibilities for our
Grandchildren. In the essay, Keynes predicted that in 100 years' time,
people in the developed world would be working for about 15 hours per
week on average. He claimed that because of rapid technological
advancement and productivity growth, people would work less and still
meet their needs. He thought that we would have more leisure time, and
worried about how people might use it. This prediction was made for the
year 2030, just a few years away. We are still far away from the
conditions of life and work he imagined.

As explained by Keynes' biographer, Lord Edward Skidelsky, in `How Much
is Enough' (Skidelsky \protect\hyperlink{ref-Skidelsky2013}{2013}),
Keynes was largely correct in his predictions on technological
advancement. However, we have not seen a commensurate decrease in
working hours or the wage growth that would allow society to meet its
needs with reduced working hours for its citizens. From the latest ONS
figures, full-time workers in the UK put in an average of 37.5 hours per
week. Those working part-time work on average 16.1 hours per week (ONS
\protect\hyperlink{ref-ONS2016b}{2016}\protect\hyperlink{ref-ONS2016b}{c}).
So, even what we consider nowadays to be a `part-time' working schedule
has more weekly hours than Keynes' predictions.

Work, in the form of paid employment, plays a huge role in our
conception and experience of modern life. Many of us spend more of our
waking hours in work environments than at home or in social situations.
Even these basic categories are not fully descriptive, as our work
colleagues can often become our friends and spouses, and our homes may
also be our offices. Moreover, the concept of a career (as opposed to
merely a `job') plays a central role in our sense of identity and
personal purpose. One of the most common questions asked when meeting
someone is, `What do you do'? Those without an impressive answer may
feel a sense of personal shame at being unable to join in on this modern
introduction ritual (YouGov and Will Dahlgreen
\protect\hyperlink{ref-YouGov2015}{2015}). This is no surprise - for
most of us, the importance of our role in the workforce and the
centrality of a career to our personhood has been drummed into us
through the questions asked in our childhoods such as `What will you be
when you grow up?'

\hypertarget{defining-work-as-leisure-or-toil}{%
\subsection{Defining work as Leisure or
Toil}\label{defining-work-as-leisure-or-toil}}

For such a widely used term, the specific meaning of `work' seems
strangely hard to pin down. A standard definition might be `the exertion
of effort in exchange for remuneration,' although that would not account
for unpaid domestic labour or the efforts of entrepreneurs and artists
who are yet to see income from their activities. Even within this
definition, the breadth of experiences covered is striking. For example,
handsomely-paid actors who live out their dreams by appearing in films
call this activity `work'. This is the case even if they would perform
the same exertions for much less remuneration. Similarly, an exhausted
cleaner, vacuuming office buildings at 2 AM on a very low wage because
they need money to pay for rent and food, is also performing `work'.

Work is often talked about by politicians as though it is an absolute
good. To some, to be `in work' is always better than to be `out of
work', no matter what the job is, or what other worthwhile activities
the `out-of-work' person might be performing (Wintour, Patrick Wintour,
and Mulholland \protect\hyperlink{ref-PatrickWintour2010}{2010}).
Slogans about getting people into work are regularly parroted, and often
precede restrictions on access to benefits. Yet, as the above example
demonstrates, work can be a purposeful and fulfilling activity which a
person engages in for its own sake, or a drudgery which a person does
purely for the purpose of remuneration. This difference is clarified by
Skidelsky, who makes a useful distinction between work as `leisure' and
work as `toil'. \emph{Leisure} is described as activity done for its own
sake, because it is intrinsically purposeful to the person performing
the activity, rather than for an extrinsic reward. Notably, this
definition of leisure does not equate to idleness. As Skidelsky writes,

\begin{quote}
'\emph{The sculptor engrossed in cutting marble, the teacher intent on
imparting a difficult idea, the musician struggling with a scene, the
scientist exploring {[}\ldots{}{]} space and time. Such people have no
other aim other than to do well at what they are doing. They may receive
an income for their efforts,but that income is not what motivates
them.'} (Skidelsky \protect\hyperlink{ref-Skidelsky2013}{2013})
\end{quote}

Toil, on the other hand, is activity with no intrinsic value to the
person performing it. It is done solely for an extrinsic end, usually a
paycheck. Of course, this division is not clear cut; a lawyer might be
engaging in leisure when fighting a cause they believe in, and toiling
when they are not. An artist who sells a few paintings may be engaging
in leisure, but also has to toil as a taxi driver to make ends meet. An
activity which is fun and enjoyable once per week, may become toil when
it is performed on a punishing 40 hour-a-week schedule. So these
concepts are limited, but useful, because they help us to direct
ourselves towards what we want more of in society (purposeful activity)
and clarify what we want less of (drudgery). We therefore apply these
terms in the following discussion of welfare and work, as they help
better flesh out the issues that can arise with policies geared at
`getting people back into work'.

\hypertarget{work-as-benefit-or-harm}{%
\subsection{Work as Benefit or Harm}\label{work-as-benefit-or-harm}}

The concept of work is also broad in relation to benefit or harm. In its
common usage, `work' is a word used to describe both activities which
are beneficial to society and activities which are socially destructive.
The activity performed by a teacher, for example, is generally
considered socially useful. A good teacher helps children to develop
into thoughtful, mature adults. A teacher imparts valuable knowledge and
skills which prepare students for further study, future employment, and
life in the outside world. This way, educated students can then go on to
make their own valuable contributions. Teachers' activities are
essential for all kinds of social progress and social cohesion.

In contrast, consider the work of an advertising executive who designs
campaigns that promote tobacco, alcohol, or online gambling. His
exertions at work are designed to encourage impulsive purchases, which
then may lead to addiction and illness. The social costs of such
outcomes can then have downstream effects on social provision like
health services, welfare, and the prison system. Much (though not all)
advertising work is an effort to create a sense of need or desire in
people which is not already present, or to create a sense of inadequacy
which (it is promised) will be relieved by purchase of the advertised
product. The result is often status anxiety, with social comparisons
between those who `have' the desired goods and those who do not, and
wastage as still-functional but `obsolete' items become undesirable.
This leads to unnecessary increases in consumption of the earth's raw
materials. The New Economics Foundation has attempted to quantify the
social value contributed by some work, and the social costs caused by
other work. In their report, A Bit Rich, they found that ``for every '£1
of value created by an advertising executive, £11.50 is destroyed.'' By
contrast, they found that for every ``£1 paid to a hospital cleaner, £10
is created in social value.'' (New Economic Foundation
\protect\hyperlink{ref-NewEconomicFoundation2009}{2009})

Consider also the work of tax accountants who specialize in tax
minimization for the super rich. Such individuals are often well-paid.
They spend their time finding loopholes in the tax system to enable
companies and wealthy individuals to avoid paying tax. It is estimated
that £12 billion is lost to the government from companies and £13
billion from individuals each year due to tax avoidance. These
activities are harmful to society as a whole, yet they are also
considered to be `work'. According to the New Economics Foundation, tax
accountants destroy £47 of value for every pound in value they generate.

There are, of course, forms of work which neither greatly benefit nor
greatly harm society. There may also be work which appears not to make
any contribution, but which may lead to a socially beneficial outcome
after a long time. Few people could have imagined, for example, that
Charles Darwin's curious hobby of cataloguing plants and animals would
lead to a theory which would underpin major scientific and medical
developments. So we cannot always tell when work is socially beneficial,
but at a basic level, we should try to incentivize that which we know to
be beneficial, and reduce that which we know to be harmful.

\hypertarget{work-value-and-pay}{%
\subsection{Work, value and pay}\label{work-value-and-pay}}

There is no clear correlation between pay and the kinds of work which
are socially beneficial. If anything, the opposite is often true. Using
the examples mentioned, tax accountants and advertising executives are
vastly better paid than the teachers, despite the often dubious outcomes
of work done by the former two kinds of professional. We could take this
point further and observe that it is possible to perform activities
which are extremely socially useful, but receive no remuneration at all.
Since they lack remuneration, there has been debate as to whether to
term these activities as `work', but activities such as child-rearing,
caring for elders, volunteer work and other forms of unpaid activity are
often of great value to society. We should keep this point in mind as we
consider the role of welfare and welfare recipients in society. Although
people may be in receipt of benefits because they have no or little
income from paid work, they may in fact be performing unpaid work which
is socially beneficial (Webber and Chris
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Webber2016}{2016}).

\hypertarget{work-in-the-uk}{%
\section{7.2 Work in the UK}\label{work-in-the-uk}}

\hypertarget{wages-and-the-growth-of-low-skilled-work}{%
\subsection{Wages and the growth of low-skilled
work}\label{wages-and-the-growth-of-low-skilled-work}}

With those broader considerations in mind, we can consider the status
quo for work here in the UK. In the three months leading up to May 2016,
the UK unemployment rate fell to its lowest figure since October 2005.
The below graph shows the unemployment rate from March 2011 to March
2016 (Richard Clegg \protect\hyperlink{ref-RichardClegg2016}{2016}).

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}c@{}}
\toprule
\includegraphics{ChapterPictures/11-1-UKUnemploymentRate.png}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\emph{Figure 7.1 - UK Unemployment Rate}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

The number of employed people reached a record high of 74.4\%. On the
surface, this seems to be great news, but just like the concept of
`work', the `employment rate' hides a myriad of experiences.

Firstly, employment often does not provide sufficient income to cover an
individual's essential outgoings. According to research by the CIPD
Institute in 2014, in-work poverty in the UK has grown by 20\% in the
past decade (CIPD \protect\hyperlink{ref-CIPD2014}{2014}). According to
the New Policy Institute, in 2012, 4.3 million working families were
receiving some form of welfare benefit, with the vast majority receiving
support in the form of tax credits. While the level of employment is at
a high not seen since the early 1970s, the annual rate of growth in wage
earnings is slowing.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}c@{}}
\toprule
\begin{minipage}[b]{0.97\columnwidth}\centering
\includegraphics{ChapterPictures/11-2-UpwardMobility.jpg}\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.97\columnwidth}\centering
\emph{Figure 7.2 - Cartoon showing the folies of upward mobility and the
working poor}\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

The Guardian economics editor Larry Elliot (Larry Elliott
\protect\hyperlink{ref-LarryElliott2016}{2016}) suggests three reasons
why this might be occurring. Firstly, he suggests that the UK is
attracting people from other EU countries, so employers can comfortably
find workers without increasing wages (Brexit may well put a dent in the
number of EU citizens wanting to come to the UK). He believes that
restrictions on public sector pay have been a factor. Finally, the jobs
being created tend to be low-paid, such as those in hospitality. The
CIPD Institute suggests that the government has taken a `low road'
approach to industrial policy, whereby the workforce are relatively
disposable, providing relatively standardized goods and services at a
low price, and firms come to the UK because of the country's low
corporate tax rates. They argue:

\emph{``Not only does a drift towards a low-road labour market and
economy make for unfulfilling working lives for many (with associated
stress and health costs attached), it supports the increase of
low-skilled, low-paid work, helps fuel the growth in `in-work' poverty,
and at least some of the costs of employers adopting such practices are
being passed on to the taxpayer and government via in-working tax
credits that top up low wages.''} (CIPD
\protect\hyperlink{ref-CIPD2014}{2014})

\hypertarget{underemployment-and-dissatisfaction-at-work}{%
\subsection{Underemployment and dissatisfaction at
work}\label{underemployment-and-dissatisfaction-at-work}}

A related phenomenon is underemployment and under-utilization of skills.
The Spring 2016 Employee Outlook report from CIPD found that a third of
employees believe that they are overqualified for their jobs (CIPD
\protect\hyperlink{ref-CIPD2016}{2016}). As well as contributing to low
wages, this is likely to lead to dissatisfaction at work. The ONS
compared the educational distribution in the UK labour market against
average educational attainment per occupation. Their findings, shown
below, were that the percentage of employees who were overqualified for
their jobs had steadily increased since 2010 (Fred Foxton
\protect\hyperlink{ref-FredFoxton2016}{2016}).

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}c@{}}
\toprule
\includegraphics{ChapterPictures/11-3-MismatchedEmployment.png}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\emph{Figure 7.3 - Mismatched Employment }\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

The CIPD report found that a third of employees thought that their
organization did not provide them with the opportunity to learn and
grow. Over a quarter felt dissatisfied with opportunities to grow their
skills. Our earlier discussion introduced the concepts of work as
inherently meaningful and work as toil. It seems probable that when
people feel as though their abilities are being underutilized, they are
more likely to experience their work as toil.

Work will also seem toilsome if it feels meaningless or pointless. A
YouGov survey from 2015 investigated meaninglessness and work. 37\% said
that their job is not making a meaningful contribution to the world.
33\% said that their work was not very fulfilling or not at all
fulfilling. Another 45\% said their work was `fairly fulfilling' (YouGov
and Will Dahlgreen \protect\hyperlink{ref-YouGov2015}{2015}). Clearly
this is a far cry from the ideal of people undertaking deeply satisfying
and meaningful work which one would perform for its own sake. Additional
research also revealed widespread employee dissatisfaction. The 2016
employee sentiment poll from Investors in People reported that 1 in 3
employees in the UK are unhappy with their current job, and 49\% were
looking for a new job in 2016 (Investors In People
\protect\hyperlink{ref-InvestorsinPeopleHQ2016}{2016}).

\hypertarget{illness-and-wellness}{%
\subsection{Illness and Wellness}\label{illness-and-wellness}}

Another cause of workplace dissatisfaction that appears again and again
in employee surveys is an insufficient work-life balance (Antonia Molloy
\protect\hyperlink{ref-AntoniaMolloy2015}{2015}). A punishing work
schedule can transform work into toil. It can also contribute to
workplace stress, mental illness, physical illness, and family discord.
Worryingly, the number of people working excessively long hours is
increasing in the UK. A total of 3.417 million people are working longer
than 48 hours per week, an increase of 15\% since 2010 (Middleton
\protect\hyperlink{ref-RachelMiddleton2015}{2015}). The associated
health risks are well documented. There is a direct correlation between
the length of a working week and stroke risk. A comprehensive study by
University College London (Sarah Boseley
\protect\hyperlink{ref-SarahBoseley2015}{2015}) found that those working
between 41 and 48 hours had a 10\% higher risk of stroke and those
working 49 to 55 hours per week had a 27\% increased risk of stroke. The
over 55 hour group also had a 13\% increased risk of coronary heart
disease. Other studies have shown increased risk of diabetes and
obesity. These findings are unsurprising when we consider that long
working hours often entail more time being sedentary, less time for
physical exercise, less time to prepare healthy meals and less time for
relaxing or sleeping. These basic lifestyle factors which underpin good
health are all undermined by long working hours.

Overwork doesn't only show itself in physical illness. The Mental Health
Foundation warns,

\begin{quote}
\emph{``The pressure of an increasingly demanding work culture in the UK
is perhaps the biggest and most pressing challenge to the mental health
of the general population.''}(Mental Health Foundation
\protect\hyperlink{ref-MentalHealthFoundation2018}{2018})
\end{quote}

In 2014/15, there were 440,000 reported cases of work-related stress,
depression, and anxiety. This translated to 9.9 million working days
lost annually, with an average of 23 days per case. Stress accounted for
35\% of all work-related ill-health cases (Health and Safety Executive
\protect\hyperlink{ref-HealthandSafetyExecutive2018}{2018}). However,
long working hours aren't the only causes of mental illness. Other work
factors reported included tight deadlines, excessive responsibility, a
lack of managerial support, and workload pressures.

Clearly, the current status of work in the UK today is far from the
future which Keynes envisioned. Rather, overwork and underemployment are
both prevalent factors, with some workers suffering from lack of
work-life balance, and others from low pay (and some from both). Many
experience their work as toil, feeling little satisfaction or meaning,
whilst those making meaningful contributions to society may be unpaid or
poorly paid. Importantly, the labour market does not distinguish between
work which is beneficial or harmful to society in the way those jobs are
remunerated. There is a need to apply new approaches and perspectives in
addressing issues related to labour markets and state provision of
safety nets. It is to this that we now turn.

\hypertarget{welfare}{%
\section{7.3 Welfare}\label{welfare}}

\begin{quote}
\emph{``I have reduced hours and taken time off from work and will have
to do so again in order to continue caring. I am torn between caring,
working and being there for my own family. I don't want to care anymore
but I have no choice. I will jeopardise my job, health and personal life
in the process. I don't know what will happen to me in the future.''}
`Jane', carer (Carers UK \protect\hyperlink{ref-CarersUK2014}{2014})
\end{quote}

\begin{quote}
\emph{``The statements flying around about the `work shy' and `people
who don't work for their money' are actually pretty offensive to me.
This is not a life that we chose and my own experiences have shown me
that it really could happen to anyone - we have gone from living in a
privately rented home and earning a good wage to the very real struggles
of living in social accommodation while struggling to get by.''}
`Christina,' living with illness (Fishwick and Carmen Fishwick and
Guardian readers \protect\hyperlink{ref-Fishwick2013}{2013})
\end{quote}

\begin{quote}
\emph{``Trying to work full time (which is necessary!) and look after my
father caused me to almost get to breaking point.This is when I was
advised to contact social services about direct payments. I have since
found out that I could have received direct payments for the past three
years due to my father's condition, but nobody advised our family of
this''} `Sara,' carer
\end{quote}

\begin{quote}
*``Even though I had been actively looking for work, and proved I was,
when I spoke to my local centre about my difficulties in leaving my
house, I was spoken to like a''benefit bum" and was sanctioned with
absolutely no benefits for FIVE WEEKS. I was finished. I got more into
debt, and had to rely on family to help me out. I really think a lot of
the problems in people not finding work is down to the advisors in Job
Centres who make claimants feel dumb, worthless and who obviously need
extra help. I truly think this is where the government need to start,
rather than just slashing people's payments.``* `Martin,' age 25. After
becoming unemployed, he started receiving JSA. He became depressed while
unemployed and missed an appointment, leading to benefit sanction.
\end{quote}

\begin{quote}
\emph{``I'm sick of the government only describing the working as `the
strivers'. I AM a striver too, I worked incredibly hard to get into the
best university in the country, but I can't work. That isn't MY fault.
But I am STRIVING to get better and make a decent contribution to
society. I wish I could give those ministers in the multimillion pound
homes a piece of my mind.''} `Bernadette,' aged 18, has clinical
depression.
\end{quote}

\hypertarget{what-is-welfare}{%
\subsection{What is Welfare?}\label{what-is-welfare}}

People who are unable to find work, are too ill to work, are retired
from work, are too young to work, or whose work doesn't generate a
livable income, still need the means to live. They still have to pay for
food, shelter, heating, medical care, transport, and family costs. This
is where government assistance, known alternatively as `social
security', `social insurance', `welfare', and `benefits', comes in.
Welfare exists to prevent people from becoming destitute. It aims to
provide a bare minimum standard of living.

The origin of the welfare state may be traced back to late Victorian
Britain, during which liberal policymakers responded to the widespread
squalor, poverty, and criminality prevalent during industrial
revolution. The modern welfare state was formed amidst the idealism of
the post-WWII period, and it was set up to tackle the `Five Giant
Evils': Want (Poverty), Disease, Ignorance, Squalor (Homelessness), and
Idleness(Unemployment) as described by William Beveridge (Beveridge
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Beveridge1942}{1942}). The Labour Party sought to
eliminate these evils in their pledge to provide for the people of the
United Kingdom ``from the cradle to the grave'' through their victory in
the 1945 general election. The plan for the welfare state was visionary,
in the sense that it was motivated by a vision of the future which could
be much better than the present and the past.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}c@{}}
\toprule
\includegraphics{ChapterPictures/11-4-BeveridgeEvils.jpg}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\emph{Figure 7.4 - Beveridge and society's five evils}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

Philosophically, it had two moral underpinnings. Firstly, it was based
on reciprocity. This is the idea that if you've paid in, you're entitled
to take out. Secondly, it had an absolute moral position, which said
that whether a person had contributed or not, it would be wrong to allow
them to become destitute. Thus, a multifaceted welfare system emerged in
the United Kingdom, built from a raft of different policies to protect
the citizens from destitution. These include social insurance for the
unemployed and sick and those injured at work, a national health
service, free education, council housing, and increased employment
through public spending.

The welfare state has grown rapidly since its inception. In 2015/16, the
total benefit pay out, (including the state pension) by the Department
for Work and Pensions is expected to amount to about £171 billion (23\%
of public spending).(fact \protect\hyperlink{ref-Fullfact2015}{2015})
This does not include the costs of administering the benefits. £116
billion is projected to be spent on benefits for pensioners (including
state pension) and £53 billion on working age people. Benefits and tax
credits together are projected to amount to £210 billion in 2015 (fact
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Fullfact2015}{2015}).

There is, of course, a sympathetic relationship between the issues with
work outlined above, and demand for the welfare system. With increasing
numbers of people in low-wage jobs, there is a parallel increase in the
need for supplementary income from the state insurance mechanisms.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}c@{}}
\toprule
\includegraphics{ChapterPictures/11-5-RealWages2009.png}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\emph{Figure 7.5 - Drop in real wages growth since 2009}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

With an increase in precarious, short-term jobs comes an increased need
for unemployment benefit to fill in the gaps in employment. Overwork and
unhealthy work habits can lead to illness, which then require the
payment of Employment and Support Allowance. Built around the model of
long-term employment with a single employer, the current welfare state
is unsuited to the demands of today's working environments.

Today's welfare state covers five main categories of welfare spending:

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\tightlist
\item
  Incapacity, Disability and Injury Benefits
\item
  Pension Spending
\item
  Unemployment Benefits
\item
  Housing (including Housing Benefit and Rent Rebate)
\item
  Family Benefits, Income Support and Tax Credit
\end{enumerate}

\hypertarget{issues-with-the-benefit-system}{%
\section{7.4 Issues with the benefit
system}\label{issues-with-the-benefit-system}}

\hypertarget{the-benefit-trap}{%
\subsection{The `benefit trap'}\label{the-benefit-trap}}

One of the problems with means-tested benefits is that they can create a
disincentive to seeking paid employment. A person receiving benefits may
find that their benefits cease when they take a job, and they also pay
tax on their earnings, which often leaves them scarcely better off than
they were on benefits. The current system is engaged in a shift from a
sharp cut-off point to a gradual phase-out. With the former, when the
costs of commuting to work and/or childcare are taken into account, this
creates a strong disincentive for the unemployed to take up a low-wage
job.

The diagram below shows how benefits taper off as take home pay
increases, for a lone parent with two children. We can see that the
parent could hold a job which makes £175 per week, and along with
benefits, will receive a net income of around £570 per week. If the lone
parent decides to increase her income from paid work (usually by
increasing working hours), to '£400 per week, she will be barely making
any more in net income than she was before - around £590 per week.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}c@{}}
\toprule
\includegraphics{ChapterPictures/11-6-ParentingCosts.png}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\emph{Figure 7.6 - Lone Parent with 2 children and childcare
costs}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

Similarly the below chart shows how increases in household incomes can
provide `disincentives' for some when income reaches beyond certain
thresholds, creating a jagged transition for income progressivity (Dyson
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Dyson2015}{2015}).

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}c@{}}
\toprule
\includegraphics{ChapterPictures/11-7-TaxRates.png}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\emph{Figure 7.7 - How tax rates rise and fall}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

When we add the means-testing of benefits, the situation is even worse.
For every £1 earned, 70p or more of benefits are withdrawn. This is
clearly a disincentive against work, a `welfare trap'.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}c@{}}
\toprule
\begin{minipage}[b]{0.97\columnwidth}\centering
\includegraphics{ChapterPictures/11-8-MTR.png}\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.97\columnwidth}\centering
\emph{Figure 7.8 - Benefit Withdrawal and Marginal Tax Rates, with RSA
Proposals}\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

\hypertarget{administration}{%
\subsection{Administration}\label{administration}}

Many benefits require claimants to inform the Department of Work and
Pensions of any changes of circumstances which may affect their
benefits. Such changes may include, for example, a decline or
improvement in an illness which may affect one's capacity to work or
affect one's living support needs. A gift of some money may affect
someone's Job Seeker's Allowance. In many cases, the claimant is obliged
to volunteer the information to the DWP. In some cases (as for ESA and
PIP), capability assessments are made by the department.

When a change in circumstances affecting entitlement occurs, this can
often mean a sudden withdrawal of benefits and a long wait while
decisions are appealed. There are also significant waiting times for
people once they have submitted applications until payments materialise,
particularly in the case of JSA and Housing Benefit. When these gaps in
support occur, individuals often experience serious economic hardship
and mental stress.

The following real-life case studies demonstrate ways in which hardship
can occur:

\textbf{Liam:}

Liam received Employment and Support Allowance for mental health and
mobility issues. After undergoing a work capability assessment, his ESA
was withdrawn. Liam appealed the decision and after four months, his ESA
was reinstated. However, he was without income for several weeks between
the termination of his ESA and applying for JSA. He attempted to make
savings and was compelled to go to a local food bank. His anxiety issues
increased and the process exacerbated his young son's anxiety issues.
After having ESA reinstated, it was again withdrawn after another work
capacity assessment and he was forced to go through the same process
again. He says,

\begin{quote}
\emph{``It's hard when you have to make choices. Do you cut down on the
electricity you're using or do you cut down on the food? And when you're
cutting right down to the bare minimum it's hard to cut back any more''}
(Child Poverty Action Group
\protect\hyperlink{ref-ChildPovertyActionGroupa}{2018}\protect\hyperlink{ref-ChildPovertyActionGroupa}{b})
\end{quote}

This example demonstrates the hardship which can occur from an incorrect
work capability assessment and from any form of sudden disruption to
income. The frequency of errors in work capability assessments is
worrying. Figures recently released by the DWP show that tribunals
overturned 52\% of Employment and Support Allowance appeals in the
period Oct 2014-Dec 2014.

\textbf{Sarah: }

Sarah is a single parent and is at university. During the student
summer, she has to go on job seeker's allowance and is subject to the
conditionality criteria even though she would be unable to take up work
because of her studies. She receives housing benefit during the summer
months and this is reduced during term time. She says that whenever she
has to reapply for Housing Benefit, she always has problems or delays:

\begin{quote}
\emph{``It causes me nothing but trouble. Last scholastic year I had to
restart my housing benefit because they stopped it\ldots{} it's just
stress, stress, stress, stress, stress, all the time. Are they going to
do it properly? Every time, twice a year I have to change my
circumstances with them. And it's never once gone right, not once.''}
(Child Poverty Action Group
\protect\hyperlink{ref-ChildPovertyActionGroup}{2018}\protect\hyperlink{ref-ChildPovertyActionGroup}{c})
\end{quote}

These issues have exacerbated her anxiety and this has had an effect on
her studies. She also feels that she has taken out some of the stress on
her young son as there are only the two of them in the family.

\textbf{Emma: }

Emma and her husband have very variable monthly incomes. They also
receive tax credits. Despite contacting the DWP on a monthly basis to
inform them of their fluctuating incomes, they were overpaid. As a
result, they are now not receiving any tax credits at all. They now feel
that even if they are entitled to tax credits, they are more trouble
than they are worth.

\begin{quote}
\emph{``Currently we're not receiving any tax credits. We've not had
anything for a wee bit and anything we do receive now would be offset
against the over payment received. But we've come to the conclusion now
that it's been so much more hassle than it's worth that, I think if I'm
entitled to something then I should get it, but I'm scared to spend
it.''} (Child Poverty Action Group
\protect\hyperlink{ref-ChildPovertyActionGroupb}{2018}\protect\hyperlink{ref-ChildPovertyActionGroupb}{a})
\end{quote}

\hypertarget{stigma}{%
\subsection{Stigma}\label{stigma}}

There is a significant social stigma in receiving government assistance.
Television shows like `Benefits Street' and salacious tabloid headlines
have contributed to the idea that those receiving benefits are lazy or a
drain on society. Political and media rhetoric arguing for `crackdowns
on benefit cheats' have also fostered a culture in which people claiming
benefits are viewed as untrustworthy and lazy. In such an environment,
it can be seen as shameful to receive benefits.

In 2012, the charity, Turn2us UK, commissioned a study (Baumberg et al.
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Baumberg2012}{2012}) to assess the impact of
stigma in applying for benefits. They found that the wider public sees
benefit claimants as less deserving now than they did twenty years ago,
with particular increases around the early 1990s and 2000s. They
observed that these increases correlated strongly with non take-up of
benefits, suggesting that many people do not take up the benefits to
which they are entitled out of a desire to avoid the associated stigma.
Worryingly, given the prevalence of mental illness in Britain, the study
found that social stigma contributed to feelings of low self-esteem and
worthlessness in claimants. As one contributor to the study who was
claiming Job-seeker's allowance stated,

\begin{quote}
\emph{``I know I'm not a scrounging bit of scum but when it's told you
over and over again and that's all you hear I can understand some people
get really affected by it.''} (Baumberg et al.
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Baumberg2012}{2012})
\end{quote}

The study also found that countries with benefit systems based on
citizenship or contribution, see lower levels of benefit stigma than
those with benefits based on means testing.

Benefits exist to prevent extreme poverty, to ensure a minimum standard
of living for people, to enable people to take part in the economy and
social life of the nation, and to help individuals better themselves. It
is beneficial for the nation as a whole that those who are entitled to
benefit receive them.

There is, however, a serious problem of people not taking up their
benefit entitlements. In the period 2014-15, only 6 out of every 10
people who were entitled to pension credit claimed this benefit. Only 5
out of 10 of those entitled to income-based jobseeker's allowance
claimed it. 1.4 million families who were entitled to housing benefit
did not submit a claim.

According to a 2014governmental report, ``Take-up may be affected by
factors such as the attractiveness of the benefit, lack of awareness of
the benefit or application procedure, lack of awareness of entitlement,
the perceived stigma of receiving a benefit or other factors.'' (ONS
\protect\hyperlink{ref-ONS2016c}{2016}\protect\hyperlink{ref-ONS2016c}{b})

The chart below shows the proportion of unclaimed benefits to overpaid
benefits.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}c@{}}
\toprule
\includegraphics{ChapterPictures/11-9-MispaidBenefits.png}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\emph{Figure 7.9 - Mis-paid Benefits }\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

\hypertarget{criteria-for-a-new-welfare-model}{%
\section{7.5 Criteria for a New Welfare
Model}\label{criteria-for-a-new-welfare-model}}

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  \textbf{Flexibility} The welfare system needs to be adapted to a
  current work environment, in which people go in and out of short-term
  contracts and may be working part-time. The current system involves a
  time-consuming application process which is not responsive enough to
  changing conditions in people's work lives.\\
\item
  \textbf{Stability} The system should, as far as possible, minimise or
  eliminate anxiety-inducing disruptions to income. Whether due to
  delays in processing applications, or because a claimant has changed
  their address or experienced some other life change, the current
  system imposes delays and cuts to benefits. This can cause extreme
  anxiety and repercussions on family members.
\item
  \textbf{Enabling} In regards to support into work, the system should
  enable people to find their own way towards what they want to do.
  Ineffectual fortnightly appointments and compulsory work programmes
  often do not provide the tailored support needed. The goal should be
  to assist people to find work which is fulfilling and enjoyable for
  them (work as leisure), rather than taking any job for fear of benefit
  sanction (work as toil).
\item
  \textbf{Balance} The welfare system and industrial policy generally
  should promote, as far as possible, a flexible workforce in which
  people are able to avoid illness-causing overwork. Improved work-life
  balance is likely to help carers, parents and older people who want to
  continue working past retirement age. It is also likely to reduce
  unemployment, as people are able to share jobs.
\item
  \textbf{Non-stigmatising} The current system is extremely
  stigmatising, particularly for the unemployed. Some of this stigma
  derives from compulsory and infantilising processes, such as requiring
  people to fill in a job diary, attend fortnightly meetings, and take
  any job offered. Some stigma also derives from the fact that the
  benefits are means-tested.\\
\item
  \textbf{Simple} The welfare system should be as simple as possible,
  and avoid excessive and unnecessary bureaucracy. Complexity creates
  confusion about entitlements, which can then lead to costly
  sanctioning.
\item
  \textbf{Incentivising} The welfare model should avoid creating a
  benefits trap in which people experience a high effective marginal tax
  rate when they move from benefits to working.
\item
  \textbf{Modernised} The welfare system should make use of
  technological advances as much as possible. Allowing people to submit
  information online rather than fill in pages of paper forms, can save
  both time and money.
\item
  \textbf{Sufficient} Many people are struggling to make ends meet on
  the benefits they receive. Many carers, for example, are sacrificing
  basic essentials as they try to survive on Carer's Allowance.
  Jobseeker's allowance is too low for most to live on, so for those who
  cannot rely on savings or family and friends, it can be extremely
  difficult to survive whilst looking for work.
\end{itemize}

\hypertarget{current-changes-to-the-welfare-system}{%
\subsection{Current Changes to the Welfare
System}\label{current-changes-to-the-welfare-system}}

Much has been said already of the issues in the current welfare system.
Bureaucracy and expense, over-complexity, and poor built-in incentives
have plagued the system since Beveridge's proposal for a `Social
Insurance' system (Beveridge
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Beveridge1942}{1942}) was published in 1942.
Following the `National Assistance Act' in 1948, the first of
Beveridge's policies implemented by Atlee's Labour government,
successive British governments have continued to build and shape the
modern welfare system into what it is today.

Beyond the original report, the reforms have generally lacked
overarching strategy. There have been a number of jolting,
ill-thought-out changes made to the administration of welfare in the
United Kingdom, as each political party sought to make their own mark on
improving the system. It seems then that tackling the problems of the
welfare system may have had cross-party support, but that there has been
no cross-party agreement on a coherent plan to fix them.

Damien Green, the current DWP secretary, said it is ``compulsory to
quote William Beveridge in any review of welfare policy.'' Beveridge
laid the foundations for the modern welfare system, and is remembered
for stating that ``the object of government in peace and war is not the
glory of rulers or of races, but the happiness of the common man.'' This
is, of course, what the welfare system aims to achieve - if you
understand `happiness' as the ability to live a dignified existence with
sufficient access to nutrition, shelter and healthcare. The entire
endeavour is founded on the idea that any civilised society needs an
economic `safety net' for its poorest, and most at need. In any reforms
this principle must be held above all others. The system may be
efficient, it may be beautifully designed, but above all it must ensure
that enough support is given to those who need it to survive.

A welfare system must also be sustainable. Firstly, it must ensure that
sufficient revenues are collected from those in employment to fund this
`collective insurance', and secondly it must encourage those who are
able to seek employment from other sources than the government. This
should be a welfare system, rather than a welfare state. The current
welfare system arguably doesn't do a good enough job at encouraging
people back into work. This is, in part, due to built-in bugs that mean
an individual faces a `cliff-edge' when they work above a certain,
arbitrary threshold. {[}\protect\hyperlink{_ftn3}{3{]}}There is also a
lack of effective retraining opportunities and support that would enable
an individual to upskill themselves and seek more fulfilling employment.
These are important considerations when planning any kind of reform to
the current welfare system.

The most recent overhaul of Welfare fell to Iain Duncan-Smith, then the
Secretary for the Department of Work and Pensions (DWP). This overhaul
was spearheaded by `Universal Credit'. First proposed as a concept in a
2009 report by Duncan Smith's think tank, the Centre for Social Justice
(Centre for Social Justice
\protect\hyperlink{ref-CentreforSocialJustice2009}{2009}), the
government legislated for UC in their Welfare Reform Act 2012.

It was announced that the `best performing' DWP and Tax-Credit
processing centres would be chosen to run the pilot scheme from 2013.
This was subject to a great deal of critique as to the `overly
ambitious' (Norris \protect\hyperlink{ref-Norris2016}{2016}) timetable
chosen for the UC roll out. Such criticisms have also been echoed in the
National Audit Office's report on `Rolling out Universal Credit'
(National Audit Office
\protect\hyperlink{ref-NationalAuditOffice2018}{2018}). In this, they
allege that the rapid implementation of the Universal Credit scheme has
had detrimental impacts on the aims of the project - which include
saving money on administration, running costs and promoting people to
re-enter the workforce. The National Audit Office, which oversees
government spending, said that the universal credit programme was
``driven by an ambitious timescale'' and that it had suffered from
``weak management, ineffective control and poor
governance''.{[}\protect\hyperlink{_ftn4}{4{]}} They recommended that
the roll-out be much slower, with a great deal more monitoring to ensure
that any potential impacts on claimants are accurately assessed and
accounted for.

At inception, Universal Credit had cross-party support. The policy
involved combining six different means-tested benefits, and their
associated IT systems, into one coordinated benefit. The benefits which
were consolidated were Income Support, Income-based Jobseeker's
allowance (JSA), Income-based Employment and Support Allowance (ESA),
Housing benefit, Child tax-credit and Working Tax-credits. The purpose
was to streamline these benefits and make it easier to claim

Unlike with the old system, there is no limit to the number of hours
that an individual claimant can work. Rather, the system operates on a
universal entitlement principle, whereby a base threshold of income is
set which is thereafter reduced on a flat rate as an individual's
earnings increase.

This adjustment to the system means that people on a low income no
longer face the `cliff-edge' of the 100\% benefits withdrawal rate once
they start working more than 16 hours. It is thought that a more gradual
withdrawal rate, like that built into the new system, encourages such an
individual back into full-time employment as it ensures that no one is
better off claiming benefits than they would be working. Universal
Credit currently sets this at a 63\% withdrawal rate. This means that
for every £1 earned above the income threshold, £0.63 is removed from
their Universal credit entitlement.

The title is perhaps a misnomer. Universal credit is still subject to
eligibility criteria. An individual must be between age 18 and
state-pension credit age, not in full-time education or training and
with savings under £16,000. They are also still subject to a maximum
income threshold, above which they are no longer able to claim Universal
Credit.

The Institute for Fiscal Studies has warned of a possibility that `over
three million households will see lower entitlements from universal
credit with an average loss of £1,800 a year (and around two million
households will see bigger entitlements with an average gain of £1,400 a
year)' if they are not eligible for transitional protection (Hood and
Waters \protect\hyperlink{ref-Hood2017}{2017}). Claimants for Child Tax
credit and Working Tax credit will be the hardest hit by these
changes.{[}\protect\hyperlink{_ftn5}{5{]}} For those who fear a sharp
reduction in their benefits entitlements, there is a transitional
smoothing mechanism built in to the system. This is part of the
Government's commitment that `no-one will be worse off under Universal
Credit'. Provided an individual has claimed correctly for their benefits
entitlements in time for the universal credit roll out, any loss in
income when transferring to the new system will be accounted for by a
transitional top-up payment. This, of course, omits those who have not,
or cannot, fully engage with the current UK welfare system (e.g.~the
homeless, those with mental-illnesses and those who have fallen through
the cracks in the social security system).

With over 1 million claimants now within the Universal Credit scheme, it
has become apparent that there are some major flaws within the
administration of the scheme. Designed to replicate the payment
schedules of traditional employers, Universal Credit payments are made
in arrears. This means that a claimant must submit their projected
income for the month at least four weeks in advance. This obviously
ignores the fact that most people who live on small incomes often
receive payment on a weekly basis. Under the old system, the goal was to
pay benefits within two weeks of a claim. Under Universal Credit, there
is a formal waiting period of one week with no money when someone is
onboarded to the scheme. With an average initial processing time of two
weeks for every applicant, this means that there is at least a six week
wait built into system before any benefits are paid out. However, around
25\% of all Universal claimants must wait more than 6 weeks to receive
their first payment in full because of errors and problems in evidencing
their claims. This has caused problems for individual budgeting,
especially for those on exceptionally low incomes, as well as for
landlords.

According to the Trussell Trust, food bank usage has continued to climb
in areas where Universal Credit has been rolled out. They claim that
this is because delayed payments have seen people struggle to afford the
basics as they wait for their entitlement to be paid. More pressingly,
because of a shift in the payment of housing benefit to being paid
directly to tenants rather than their landlords. This has caused
significant increases in the number of people falling behind with their
rent. Moreover, because the new system is fully digitized, those
claimants who lack access to the internet or a mobile phone will find it
difficult to follow up on, edit or even make new claims. This may cause
further issues in administering the payments.

Moreover, the updated welfare system still does not incorporate the
necessary retraining opportunities to effectively encourage individuals
back to work. Perhaps lessons should be learned from alternative welfare
systems like that in Switzerland, where language lessons and retraining
classes are covered by the state if an individual becomes unemployed.
Although the system makes headway by removing the `cliff-edge' and
improving the incentive mechanisms to return to work, the conditional
element of UC still penalises an individual - both in income and time -
for choosing to look for gainful employment rather than taking poorly
paid and unfulfilling roles. It is understandable that for any welfare
system to be sustainable, individuals with the capacity to work must do
so. However, without effective retraining and educational opportunities,
the bulk of the low-income workforce may remain under-skilled and
under-employed.

Universal Credit is not in itself a bad proposal. As with most political
agendas, the key lies in its administration. Streamlining the welfare
system has been well overdue. With over 25 different benefits, it can
often be an overwhelming process for claimants to ensure that they are
receiving everything which they are eligible for. However, the rapid
roll-out of the Universal Credit scheme has resulted in several
administrative issues, delayed payments and increased confusion on
behalf of the claimants. This can hardly be said to be fulfilling
Beveridge's requirements for ensuring successful welfare reform.

Universal Credit should be considered as the first step towards a new
system. It has done the `hard work' of reconciling a few different
benefits to give reformers a tractable baseline for income related
benefits. It has also gone some way to reducing the bureaucracy by
consolidating six different, separate IT systems into one, though it
must be said that the UC administrative system is still far from perfect
in terms of both operative efficiency and expense. We need now to work
on addressing the remaining conditionality in the system, which still
`penalises' individuals for working. We also must expand the focus of
these reforms to include better training opportunities and cooperation
between the state and private sector to better support people into
gainful employment. A shift in this direction would also help tackle
stigma by transforming the `welfare state' into its intended form, as a
form of social-insurance that builds an individual's
capacity/capabilities and guarantees them a sufficient and decent
standard of existence.

We therefore argue that a Citizens Dividend could be the next step
forward in combating these issues, which we will explore in the next
section in more detail.

\hypertarget{the-citizens-dividend-a-brief-introduction}{%
\section{7.6 The Citizens Dividend: A Brief
Introduction}\label{the-citizens-dividend-a-brief-introduction}}

\hypertarget{brief-history-and-principles}{%
\subsection{Brief History and
Principles}\label{brief-history-and-principles}}

In June 2016, a landmark referendum was held in Switzerland. The Swiss
went to the polls to vote on whether the Swiss government should pay
each citizen a monthly sum sufficient to allow them to live in a
dignified manner and participate in public life. In Switzerland,
referendums are commonplace - but what made this one remarkable is that
it was the first time that the citizen's dividend idea was put to a
referendum for serious consideration by the populace. Even more
significantly though, the referendum launched the idea into the
mainstream media, bringing it widespread attention, both within
Switzerland and internationally.

So what is a citizens dividend? We use the term here as synonomous with
Basic Income, but with the idea that a citizen's dividend is a `top up'
and is not intended to be enoough to live on.

There are many different models of a citizens dividend, but the core
principle is the same. The Basic Income Earth Network describes it as
follows:

\emph{'A basic income (citizens dividend) is an income unconditionally
granted to all on an individual basis, without means test or work
requirement.}

It is a form of minimum income guarantee that differs from those that
now exist in various European countries in three important ways:

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  It is being paid to individuals rather than households;
\item
  It is paid irrespective of any income from other sources;
\item
  It is paid without requiring the performance of any work or the
  willingness to accept a job if offered.' (Basic Income Earth Network
  (BIEN), \protect\hyperlink{ref-BasicIncomeEarthNetworkBIEN}{n.d.})
\end{itemize}

This idea sounds shockingly radical to many of us, who are used to the
mainstream stigmatizing of benefit claimants as lazy and work shy. For
that reason, many assume that the idea of a citizens dividend is a new
innovation. However, there has been a long history of advocation for a
citizens dividend and it has been advocated at different times and in
different countries by both progressive and conservative economists.

One of the earliest modern scholars to advocate the idea was British.
Towards the end of the First World War, philosopher Bertrand Russell
advocated a universal income sufficient for necessities, writing;

\begin{quote}
\emph{'A certain small income should be open to all, whether they work
or not and that a larger income - as much larger as might be warranted
by the total amount of commodities produced should be given to those who
are willing to engage in some work which the community recognise as
useful. When education is finished, no one should be compelled to work
and those who choose not to work should receive a base livelihood and be
left completely free.}'(Russell
\protect\hyperlink{ref-BertrandRussell1918}{1918})
\end{quote}

\hypertarget{case-studies}{%
\subsection{Case Studies}\label{case-studies}}

\hypertarget{alaska}{%
\subsection{Alaska}\label{alaska}}

The Alaska Permanent fund is a constitutionally established fund, owned
by the State of Alaska. It began in 1976 with the goal to ensure that
every Alaskan could benefit from the state's exploitation of oil
resources and that future generations could benefit even after resources
ran out. Since 1982, Alaskans have received a yearly dividend from the
fund, the amount of which varies according to returns on investments in
the fund. In 2015, the dividend payout was '£2072.

The fund has been credited with contributing income equality, with
Alaska having the second-lowest inequality of any state in the USA. In
the period from the early 1980s to 2000s,Alaska was the only state in
which the income of the bottom 20\% of the population grew faster than
the top 20\% (Merchant \protect\hyperlink{ref-BrianMerchant2015}{2015}).

\hypertarget{madhya-pradesh-india}{%
\subsection{Madhya Pradesh, India}\label{madhya-pradesh-india}}

In villages in Madhya Pradesh, every adult was given a monthly payment
of 200 rupees and every child, 100 rupees (paid to the mother or
guardian). These amounts were later increased to 300 and150
respectively. These figures mean that an average family received the
equivalent of USD\$24 or GBP'£15 a month . These amounts were initially
paid in cash, and later into bank accounts. The effect of the grants on
the communities was studied over period of eighteen months, with the
villages receiving grants compared with other `control' villages which
didn't receive the grants.

The findings were very positive. Many in receipt of the benefit used the
money to improve their housing, latrines and to protect themselves
against Malaria. There was a significant improvement in the average
weight-for-age among children, particularly with young girls. People had
better diets, partly because they could afford to eat more vegetables
and fruits. School attendance also improved.

Those receiving the payments were more likely to reduce debts. Also
there was an increase in production from small-scale investments, such
as planting improved grain, repairs to equipment and the creation of
shops. The scheme had a particularly positive effect for disadvantaged
groups, such as women, the disabled and lower caste families.

According to Professor of Development Studies Guy Standing, allowing
people to gain control over their lives was crucial to the scheme's
positive outcomes. He states,

\begin{quote}
`\emph{The policy has transformative potential for both families and
village communities. The whole is greater than the sum of the parts.
Unlike food subsidy schemes that lock economic and power structures in
place, entrenching corrupt dispensers of BPL (Below Poverty Line)
cards,rations, and the numerous government schemes that supposedly
exist, basic income grants gave villagers more control of their lives,
and had beneficial equity and growth effects.}' (Standing
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Standing2017}{2017})
\end{quote}

\hypertarget{manitoba-canada}{%
\subsection{Manitoba, Canada}\label{manitoba-canada}}

Between 1974 and 1978, the Canadian government ran a field experiment in
the town of Dauphin,Canada. As part of the experiment, any family
without income from other sources would receive a dividend amounting to
60\% of the `Statistics Canada Low Income Cut-Off' - (called LICO
(Statistics Canada \protect\hyperlink{ref-StatisticsCanada2018}{2018})).
Every dollar of income from other sources would reduce the payments by
50cents. Payments were indexed to cost of living. This meant a
particularly significant increase for people who did not qualify for
welfare under traditional schemes, such as the elderly, single,
employable males and the working poor. Those who already received social
assistance would see little change in their income.

The experiment ended without an analysis or report of findings, but in
2010 a Canadian social scientist, Dr.~Evelyn Forget, uncovered the raw
data. She found that compared with a control group,for those receiving
the income there was a significant reduction in hospitalisation,
especially for accident, injury and mental illness. Contact with
physicians regarding mental illness also reduced during the period. They
found no increase in fertility or family dissolution. A greater
proportion of students also stayed in school to Grade 12. Dr.~Forget
concluded: `These results would seem to suggest that a Guaranteed Annual
Income, implemented broadly in society, may improve health and social
outcomes at the community level.' (Forget
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Forget2011}{2011})

\hypertarget{arguments-in-favour-of-a-citizens-dividend}{%
\subsection{Arguments in favour of a Citizens
Dividend}\label{arguments-in-favour-of-a-citizens-dividend}}

\hypertarget{it-avoids-the-benefit-trap}{%
\subsection{It avoids the `benefit
trap'}\label{it-avoids-the-benefit-trap}}

The basic income concept avoids this trap because it is not means
tested. It provides a minimum income floor. Therefore, any income from
work which a person receives, will be added to this income floor. This
will make it much easier for people to take on part-time or low wage
jobs.

\hypertarget{citizens-dividend-is-simple-and-cheap-to-administer}{%
\subsection{Citizen's Dividend is simple and cheap to
administer}\label{citizens-dividend-is-simple-and-cheap-to-administer}}

Means-testing adds to the cost of administering benefits. The finances
of each claimant is individually assessed, which is time consuming and
labour intensive. For example, the cost of administering claims for
housing benefit and council tax benefit is almost 16 times higher than
the cost of administering child benefit,which is non means-tested.

Also, the Department of Work and Pensions makes individualised
disability assessments to determine claimants' eligibility for the
Employment and Support allowance and the Personal Independence Payment.
These assessments are performed by private contractors and are costly
and time-consuming. A report by the National Audit Office in January
2016 found that the over the period 2015 to 2018, the Department of Work
and Pensions expected to spend `£1.6 billion on contracted out health
and disability assessments. The cost of ESA assessments was found to
have increased from'£115 per assessment to '£190 per assessment after a
change in contractors in 2015. The process of assessment for Employment
as Support Allowance can be painful for claimants. The report found that
ESA claims take on average 23 weeks to administer,during which period,
the claimants are not entitled to full payments (Department for Work \&
Pensions \protect\hyperlink{ref-DeptForWorkAndPensions2015}{2015}).

A citizen's dividend model would require no individualised means-testing
of benefits. Most models of citizens dividend still require some benefit
for those with particular disabilities or long-term illness, who have
higher living costs as a result. Therefore, even with a citizen's
dividend, some individualised assessment would be necessary. However, it
is feasible that many people who currently receive Employment and
Support Allowance, do not have extra costs due to their illness, but are
merely unable to work. That is, many are on ESA because JSA would
require them to look for work, not because they have extra health costs.
With a Citizen's Income of a sufficient amount, it is reasonable to
believe that many of those people would be satisfied with the basic
amount, and will not require assessment for additional benefits.

As Simon Duffy of the Centre for Welfare Reform notes, `Even on its own
such a system (citizens dividend) would replace a large part of the need
for the ESA, which currently costs'£14 billion and is received by 2.5
million people (an average of `£108 per week). This would kill in one
stroke the crazy and expensive world of conditionality, sanctions,
privatised assessments and ineffective training programmes into which
disabled and sick people are currently forced.'

\hypertarget{it-reduces-the-stigma-of-receiving-benefits}{%
\subsection{It reduces the stigma of receiving
benefits}\label{it-reduces-the-stigma-of-receiving-benefits}}

The study also found that countries with benefit systems based on
citizenship or contribution, see lower levels of benefit stigma than
those with benefits based on mean-testing (Duffy
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Duffy}{2016}). The basic income would be
universal, and therefore is less likely to induce social stigma. It may
not completely remove stigma of course, as there may be some stigma
towards those who receive the benefit and do not attempt to find work.

\hypertarget{it-promotes-freedom-independence-without-compulsion}{%
\subsection{It promotes freedom \& independence, without
compulsion}\label{it-promotes-freedom-independence-without-compulsion}}

Rather than force people to apply for jobs which they have no interest
in or for which they are unsuitable, the Citizens Dividend allows them
to make decisions about what is best for them. As Sam Bowman of the Adam
Smith Institute argues,

\begin{quote}
\emph{'A basic income (citizens dividend) is the least paternalistic
welfare scheme possible. Instead of pushing would-be computer
programmers into work as Poundland assistants, a scheme like this would
leave decisions entirely up to the individuals involved. The discovery
process that each of us is engaged in would continue, and now without
mass decision-making by a central state authority}.' (Bowman
\protect\hyperlink{ref-SamBowman2013}{2013})
\end{quote}

\hypertarget{assessing-how-much-would-be-paid}{%
\subsection{Assessing how much would be
paid}\label{assessing-how-much-would-be-paid}}

Our citizen's dividend is not intended to meet all living costs. It is
intended to exist in conjunction with a workfare scheme and together
these would provide sufficient income on which to live.

To get some idea of what people might receive, we can look at the
Minimum Income Standard calculator provided by the Centre for Social
Policy and Research . They suggest that a single adult with no children
will need `£286.54 per week. This can give us an upper bound for the
amount needed. The Royal Society for the encouragement of Arts,
Manufactures and Commerce (RSA) has proposed a basic income of'£3692
annually, rising to `£7420 for pensioners (RSA
\protect\hyperlink{ref-RSA2015}{2015}). The current state pension
is'£115 per week. The below chart shows that the RSA model would provide
a more gradual marginal deduction rate as earnings increase, compared
with the status quo.

For those who are ill long-term, or disabled, we would provide a greater
amount based on their particular needs. This would be a non
means-tested, non-taxable amount. Like the Personal Independence Payment
today, an assessment of needs could be made,and supplementary amount
provided. Depending on the base level of our Citizens Dividend, a
supplementary amount may also be needed for full time carers. Simon
Duffy of the Centre for Welfare Reform proposed a system in which abled
people receive a taxable top-up to their citizen's income, as well as a
supplement based on additional needs.

In assessing disability needs, we should avoid the harsh bureaucratic
and alienating system which in operation today. Duffy (Duffy
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Duffy}{2016}) suggests a model in which people
can claim the correct disability assessment for their circumstances and
then have it validated by a GP, social worker or NHS expert (we suggest
a new department at the NHS that would do these assessments).
Reassessment should occur on a more personalised basis.

\begin{quote}
\emph{'In the end this system would help us take a big step forward
towards human rights for all, including disabled people. Nobody would be
subject to demeaning systems of control and punishment managed by the
DWP(whether they had a disability or not). Everybody would get a basic
income.Sick or disabled people would get an appropriate supplement to
that income. In addition we would organise any further support and
assistance in a way which was empowering and under the control of
disabled people themselves}.'
\end{quote}

\hypertarget{options-for-welfare-system-badly-written}{%
\section{\texorpdfstring{7.7 Options For Welfare System
\textbf{\emph{BADLY
WRITTEN}}}{7.7 Options For Welfare System BADLY WRITTEN}}\label{options-for-welfare-system-badly-written}}

So, as we have discussed, The present benefit system is a mixture of
unconditional, conditional, means-tested, taxable and non-taxable
payments. It is illogical and ill-thought through.
Additionally,different means-tested benefits are means tested in
different ways. The sum total of the system creates perverse incentives
and does not encourage work effectively. Indeed, dealing with the
benefits system is like a job in itself,both for the person claiming
benefits and for the people administering benefits. This complexity is
unnecessary because means-testing is just a tax in disguise: it takes
away money from people as wages increase. Such a function is best
performed by the income tax system, which also takes away money from
people as wages increase.

We propose a return to universal benefits with `means testing' performed
by the income tax system, rather than the benefits system, in an
integrated and smooth way. The basic universal benefit in our proposed
system is the Citizen's Dividend. It is a universal payment to all UK
citizens. The Citizen's Dividend is a per capita payment to all citizens
of the country, paid regardless of employment status. It is a universal
payment to everyone in society who is a citizen of the UK. The payment
would be initially equal to current income support levels, i.e, around
£75 a week, or £3800 per year.

There will be different rates for children (replacing child benefit and
child tax credit, paid to mothers), working-age adults (replacing income
support) and pensioners (equivalent to the existing state pension). It
provides all UK citizens with the minimum amount of income. We also
propose to offset payment of Citizen's Dividend against other taxes so
taxpayers only receive a net bill or payment.

In addition, there will need to be further payments for particular
categories of people with specific needs -- for example, disabled
people, the elderly, carers and mothers with children. We propose that
these payments would be made on a similar and consistent basis to the
Citizen's Dividend described above. There will obviously need to be
changes to the tax system in order to pay for these universal benefits,
but the system of government accounting should account for a
means-tested benefit and a taxable universal benefit with increased
income taxes the same way.

We also propose to offset payment of Citizen's Dividend against taxes.
This would specifically apply to those taxes that are highly visible
such as property taxes, so that individuals will receive or pay only the
net amount of either taxes or benefits.

The ideal education and welfare system include not only a (low) citizens
income, around the current level of income support but also an
integrated training, entrepreneurship and workfare scheme. The workfare
system would be a system that pays a small wage but also develops the
claimant's skill-set. This is also the purpose of some further education
courses. Integrating workfare with training allows continual upgrading
of the skill-set. Such training should always prepare the recipient both
for employment and for entrepreneurship/self-employment. For
example,mini-economies can be created in schools and universities to
allow older school children to trade between themselves. The
training-workfare college should develop these entrepreneurial skills
further, removing one major barrier to entry to all industries, a
general lack of entrepreneurial skills.

\hypertarget{our-approach-to-reform}{%
\subsection{Our Approach to Reform}\label{our-approach-to-reform}}

Any welfare system is complex, but the basic elements are simple.

Firstly, there are some universal benefits that are paid to everyone,
only conditional on age. Examples of these might include universal forms
of \ldots{}

Secondly, there are categories which mean people get (more) benefits,
for example if your are a carer or disabled or long-term ill. For these,
your status needs to be verified.

Thirdly, there's a system for taking money off people as they earn more.
In the benefits system this is called `means testing' whereas in the tax
system this is called `income tax'. Means testing is occasionally done,
not through income but through wealth, but we stick to the simple case
here.

Fourthly, the benefit system often relates to a system of taxes and
records of those taxes. Taxes and national insurance contributions are
again similar ideas, but the at least in principle social security
conttributions gives a `contribution record'.

There are two other features that we won't comment on here, for
simplicity's sake.\^{} {[}Fifth, in some systems, the quantity of
benefits of unemnpkloyment benefits is sometimes related to your current
income. In addition it sometimes degrades over time.

Sixth, there is often specific help to get people into work, or higher
skilled work, such as apprentiship schemes.{]}

So setting up a new system is really actually quite simple: - We need
some universal benefits, related only to age - We need a system of
conditionality, based on disabled or sickness or other status. This is
complex, and out of scope of this book, but we propose that these
conditions simply raise the non-income dependent benefit level for those
who have these conditions. It's conceptually simple: if you are verified
to have such a status, you get more money. But we don't outline in
detail the status conditions and the increase in benefits here. We need
a system of taking money off people as they get higher income. We
propose using income tax rather than a separate benefits system We need
a system of contribution records. We suggest merging Income Tax,
National Insurance and Means Testing into a \emph{single} tax at a rate
of around 40\% for the bottom 99\% of the population. Since we are
replacing means testing there would be \emph{no personal threshold}.
However, the payments of the first 4000 pounds of tax would be
consisidered a `contribution record'. The government would aim to
purchase an equivalent amount of asssets. Those assets would uprate the
unconditional benefits with an additional, funded `basic property'
allowance.

Finally we suggest help for increasing people's skills by integrated
work and training placements. This is not the main scope of this book.

We discuss this approach below.

\hypertarget{introducing-a-citizens-dividend}{%
\section{7.8 Introducing a Citizens
Dividend}\label{introducing-a-citizens-dividend}}

\hypertarget{citizens-dividend}{%
\subsection{Citizens Dividend}\label{citizens-dividend}}

As discussed earlier, a Citizens' Dividend is a per capita payment to
all citizens of the country, paid regardless of employment status. It is
intended to simplify the tax-benefit system; rather than means
testing,the rest of the tax system is used to tax away the benefit. This
Citizens Income provides everyone in the society with a minimum amount
of income to live on. It's a way of compensating people for the
inevitable costs resulting from the scarcity of natural things that are
vital to life. The level of the Citizens' Dividend might be, for
example, around £75 per week, or around £3800per year.

The citizen's income pays scarcity rents. If the fundamental things in
life were not scarce for example if there were an infinite amount of
land to grow food and live on and if the atmosphere was completely
unlimited then there would be no need for a citizens income, just as
there is no citizens income for the hunter-gatherer.In principle then,
the citizens income compensates man for that which he loses when and he
multiplies and lives in cities rather than being in the wild and living
as a hunter gather.

A Citizens income can be introduced as a simplification of the existing
tax and benefit system.It would be paid from the tax department and
replaces some existing benefits.It could be taxed away using income tax,
so maxing explicit the effective taxes implicit in means testing, and
allowing those rates to be smoothed and optimised. Also, as you increase
taxes that the unemployed do not pay, also introduce a citizens income
and net off the two. People with tax bills would only receive a net tax
bill.

Our goal for the value of the Citizen's Dividend is the current level of
income support. We would abolish this benefit and replace it with a
Citizen's Dividend paid to all. However, since the introduction of this
dividend is expensive, it may need implementing slowly. For simplicity
and political purposes, the dividend should be netted off against taxes
paid, for example on property and land. Hence, people will receive only
the net benefit or pay the net tax.

\hypertarget{different-ways-to-fund-a-citizens-dividend-scheme}{%
\subsection{Different ways to fund a Citizens Dividend
Scheme}\label{different-ways-to-fund-a-citizens-dividend-scheme}}

This article argues that there are \emph{different types} of Citizens
Dividend Scheme, depending on what the Citizens Dividend Scheme replaces
and how it is funded. Those types are a \emph{simplifying} Citizens
Dividend Scheme, a \emph{compensating} Citizens Dividend Scheme, a
\emph{redistributive} Citizens Dividend Scheme and an \emph{extra}
Citizens Dividend Scheme. A simplifying Citizens Dividend Scheme is paid
for by changes to income tax and pre-existing benefits; a
\emph{compensating} Citizens Dividend Scheme is paid for by increases in
other taxes that are paid by all, such as a carbon tax. A redistributive
Citizens Dividend Scheme is paid for by taxes on the rich; whereas an
\emph{wealth fund} Citizens Dividend Scheme is paid for by a wealth
fund.

I argue that these are not just `different ways to fund a Citizens
Dividend' but rather they are inherently different overall propositions.
A `simplifying' Citizens Dividend Scheme does not change incomes very
much but it does simplify the benefits system. A compensating Citizens
Dividend Scheme's main rationale is to remove the regressive effect of
independently worthwhile policy. A redistributive Citizens Dividend
Scheme moves money from rich to poor. And a wealth fund Citizens
Dividend Scheme increases national savings by funding the transfers with
asset purchases.

\hypertarget{a-simplifying-citizens-dividend-scheme}{%
\subsection{A Simplifying Citizens Dividend
Scheme}\label{a-simplifying-citizens-dividend-scheme}}

The main goal of a simplifying Citizens Dividend Scheme is to simplify
the existing system of welfare provision with lower benefit withdrawal
rates and a more universal aspect, so as to prevent the bureaucratic
checks that accompany means testing and conditionality. A strategy for
implementing the simplifying Citizens Dividend Scheme would be to remove
the personal allowance and find the `common feature' across many
different schemes. Then add a Citizens Dividend and at the same time
reduce benefits and allowances by the same amount across the board.

\emph{Simplifying Citizens Dividend Scheme, Typical tax increased:
Income tax (personal allowance)}

\hypertarget{a-compensating-citizens-dividend-scheme}{%
\subsection{A Compensating Citizens Dividend
Scheme}\label{a-compensating-citizens-dividend-scheme}}

The reasoning behind a `compensating' Citizens Dividend Scheme is to
compensate for changes to taxes that would otherwise be undesirable
because of their regressive effect. Environmental taxes are desirable
because they attempt to properly price externalities. Health taxes aim
to change behaviour of consumers and modify the composition of produced
foods. However, sometimes these taxes have a regressive effect, because
the poor spend more as a proportion of their income on food or energy
than the rich. A \emph{compensating} Citizens Dividend Scheme would
redistribute these tax revenues using the mechanism of the Citizens
Dividend Scheme. Examples of this approach include a carbon tax combined
with a Citizens Dividend , referred to as the `tax and dividend'
approach.

Compensating Citizens Dividend Scheme, Typical tax increased: Carbon tax

\hypertarget{a-redistributive-citizens-dividend-scheme}{%
\subsection{A Redistributive Citizens Dividend
Scheme}\label{a-redistributive-citizens-dividend-scheme}}

Like a compensating Citizens Dividend Scheme, a redistributive Citizens
Dividend Scheme is also paid for out of increased taxes. But in this
case, the taxes that would be increased would be taxes primarily on the
rich. So for example, a Land Value Tax or property tax falls more
heavily on the rich.

There are variations of a redistributive Citizens Dividend Scheme that
can be tailored to make a land value tax more palettable. For example,
there could be a personal allowance for property owners, and a Citizens
Dividend Scheme for non-property owners. In that way, a property tax is
made to favour those who own just one property. Those who own more than
one property will pay extra tax, whereas those that own none get a
compensating payment. This allowance would be equivalent to a `Citizens
Dividend Scheme for property owners' could then be extended using the
funds raised by the multiple property owners to those who are renting.

Typical tax increased: Land Value Tax (new tax)

\hypertarget{a-wealth-fund-paying-a-citizens-dividend-basic-property}{%
\subsection{A Wealth Fund paying a Citizens Dividend; Basic
Property}\label{a-wealth-fund-paying-a-citizens-dividend-basic-property}}

Whereas the previous three example would be funded by increased taxes
and/or reduced other benefits, a wealth fund basic income would be
funded by a wealth fund. Wealth funds already exist, for example the
Norwegian sovereign wealth fund. In this case the wealth fund would buy
assets such as equities, bonds, land or property. The wealth fund would
pay out dividends according to the return (dividends, interest, rent) on
the underlying assets.

But how would the assets themselves be financed? From which source?
There are a number of options: Taxation, Financial Surpluses from some
other activity, Government Borrowing, and Quantitative Easing.

An obvious example in this case would be corporation tax. Increased
corporation taxation would be used to purchase additional equities. In
effect, companies would be asked to pay an increased corporation tax in
shares. This approach was tried in Sweden for some time, and proved
successful and popular. Companies paid a portion of their taxes in
shares, and this enhanced a fund that paid a basic dividend to everyone.

Surpluses from local development are another method to fund the basic
income. For example, a local bank could be set up. This bank would
purchase land/ lend on land, and the surplus that it generates would be
stored in a local social fund. The dividends from the fund would then be
used to pay a basic income. The advantage of this approach is that the
assets paying the fund would be themselves useful to provide capital for
the bank, and the dividends would also be helpful

Another indirect way to fund a wealth fund basic income would be
Quantitative Easing or Bond Issuance, used to buy up assets, perhaps at
the same time as taxes were used to reduce those assets. Purchasing
assets and taxing them act in opposite directions in regards to the sale
price of assets. Taxing an asset in general would reduce its market
price; purchasing that asset tends to inceease the price. The
introduction of taxes on assets at the same time as purchase of assets,
allows for financial stability at the same time as capture of surplus by
the authorities.

One step beyond a basic income is basic property. This would be a basic
requirement for property for all.

\hypertarget{the-case-for-retaining-a-system-of-contributions-and-contribution-records-in-a-basic-income-scheme}{%
\subsection{The Case For Retaining A System of Contributions and
Contribution Records in a Basic Income
Scheme}\label{the-case-for-retaining-a-system-of-contributions-and-contribution-records-in-a-basic-income-scheme}}

The Beveridge report and the system of national insurance that it
brought in, amongst other things, have at its heart the dual ideas of
universal benefits and that of contributory benefits. Universal benefit
is a benefit that is paid at the same level whatever happens.
Contributory benefits are those where tax or national insurance
contributions affect the future amount of benefits provided.

The Beveridge report argued \emph{against} means testing, which can be
defined as taking away benefits as income increases. But the UK welfare
state has introduced means testing, a second income tax but this time
only on the income of those on benefits. Of course, taking money away
from people as their income rises is what income tax does, and it is odd
that in the uk there are four separate systems for doing this (income
tax, employers and employees national insurance, and means testing of
benefits, soon integrated into a single benefit, universal credit)

A simple and \emph{integrated} tax and benefits system recognises that
taxes and means testing are essentially the same thing. A benefits
system with a basic income at its heart recognises that the high
benefits withdrawal rates of the current system. So a transition to a
?4000 per year basic income could be financed (say).

\hypertarget{contributory-basic-income-increases}{%
\subsection{Contributory Basic Income
Increases}\label{contributory-basic-income-increases}}

It will be assumed here that we can fund a basic income from
environmental taxes. This would pay a basic income of £4000, but this
would not be uprated with inflation. In order to acheive our target of a
basic income of £6000 per person, the addition would be funded by actual
securities purchased in the market. The money raised to fund these
purchases would be from the following sources: taxes on company profits
or wealth, money purchase of overseas securities. The allocation of the
tax paid would be to everyday people according to the tax paid, up to
some maximum value per year.

So for example if £2000 saving would be put into securities yielding 5\%
per year, then the basic income next year (and thereafter) would be
5\%*£2000 = £100 extra per year. There would be two ways to earn these
credits.

There would be two methods for saving this £1000. First, for every £ you
pay in income tax, you might get £1 of securities set aside for you.
Second, the local authority or national government could pay you for
doing various community actions.

Communities need maintenance. Public goods need to be paid for. This
creates a basic income scheme very much like the sort of scheme
Beveridge intended, and also the welfare schemes that many countries
have, which have a `contributory' component. In other words, if you
don't work,

It is intended to be the sort of scheme that represent the and financial
interests of 99\% of the population and the value set of 80\% of the
population, that build a broader coalition than egalitarianism alone to
include community, the work ethic, as well as simiplification and the
national interest. Over time, the scheme would move to being `funded'
perhaps by taxing multinational's shares apportioned by sales so that
ownership over time moves to the fund(s) paying the basic income - a
sovereign wealth fund in other words.

In summary, the scheme encourages community involvement, eliminates the
disincentive effects and deadweight cost of income tax for everyone
earning less than £50K per annum, and makes BI more palatable to people
that subscribe to ideas that our communities, public physical
infrastructure and public goods need maintenance and that work should be
rewarded. All at no additional cost.

\hypertarget{a-basic-income-with-a-tax-contribution-record.}{%
\subsection{A basic income with a tax contribution
record.}\label{a-basic-income-with-a-tax-contribution-record.}}

The basic idea is as follows:

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  Every current citizen is granted a right to a basic income of £4000
  per year.
\item
  Income tax paid (at 40\%) between 0 and 10K is set aside to buy
  securities and thus increments additional amount to the basic income
\item
  Whilst income between 0 and 10K is taxed, the taxpayer increases his
  or her benefit entitlement in so doing, with an exactly equivalent
  value.
\item
  Community actions could also be paid in this benefit
\end{itemize}

\hypertarget{politics-of-citizens-dividend-scheme}{%
\subsection{Politics of Citizens Dividend
Scheme}\label{politics-of-citizens-dividend-scheme}}

It seems to me that the major problem with basic income is that people
aren't happy with giving money for nothing. If however, it was funded,
and there were local organisations with balance sheets paying basic
income out of a funded balance sheet, then this would be perfect,
because the income would not be seen to be coming out of taxation. It
would of course then reduce the tax burden for the state. Taking the
population seriously means that taking seriously the idea that people
will not just be interested in `money for nothing'. Perhaps it also
means that people are interested in value for value created. But if you
create value in a community you should get a reward.

For the last few years, Britain has struggled with the idea of freedom
of movement. The UK, and particularly London, are attractive places for
people across the EU to move to, partly because of the English language,
partly because the economy was booming, and partly because the
international and multicultural nature of London in particular was very
welcoming. But it has become clear that some portion of the existing
population did not feel much economic benefit from this. A basic income
if related to a real or notional personal wealth fund could allow smooth
earning of basic income by citizens and then for new residents to `buy
in' to this fund.

\hypertarget{implementation}{%
\subsection{Implementation}\label{implementation}}

\textbf{Step 1: Introduction of Payment Card}

The citizen's dividend system would be introduced as a payment card for
all citizens (similar to an oyster card).

\textbf{Step 2: Simplifying Universal Credit}

Universal credit works like this: You can opt into the system, if you
have been on another benefit and you are in an area that UC has been
rolled out to. Universal credit replaces the following benefit types:
Child Tax Credit; Housing Benefit; Income Support; income-based
Jobseeker's Allowance (JSA): income-related Employment and Support
Allowance (ESA): Working Tax Credit. Once you are in the system, it
works like this: You have a standard payment, that is set up as follows:

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  If you are are getting help with housing: you get a payment of X per
  year, not including housing costs. - If you are not getting help with
  housing: you get a payment of Y per year.
\end{itemize}

For those people in the universal credit system, replace it with a
universal payment and a standard benefits withdrawal rate of 40\%. Now,
a benefits recipient would receive a universal benefit of ?4000 per year
, and pay a standard tax of 40\% on all income coming in.

\textbf{Step 3: Simplifying Income Tax}

For people working, replace it with a basic income and the elimination
of the personal threshold. Simultaneously simplify the income tax,
employees and employers system to a standard rate of 40\% and a higher
rate of 60\% for the first percentile only. If you are in the PAYE
system you get the basic income.

Now these two groups are on a basic income:

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  People earning over the personal allowance
\item
  People qualifying for universal credit (how many are there?), and
  legacy benefits to be replaced by universal credit.
\end{itemize}

The participation basic income would be paid in two circumstances.
First, you are in work. Second, you are in receipt of universal benefits
and the legacy benefits that universal benefit allows for.

\textbf{Step 4: Reduce Income taxes, Increase Externality Taxes}

The third step is to reduce again the basic rate of income tax, and
replace it with the carbon tax, at the same time bringing into the
scheme those people who aren't either recipients of universal credit, or
full time workers above the personal allowance (as was prior to the
introduction of the scheme.

\textbf{Step 5: Basic Property Tax Free Allowance}

We adopt the same approach to property as with income. We first consider
the people who are taxed and the people on benefits and we adopt the
same allowances for these two groups. Those owning property and those on
housing benefits should have the same benefits. We then extend this
allowance to all.

\hypertarget{guaranteed-job-and-skills-training}{%
\section{7.9 Guaranteed Job and Skills
Training}\label{guaranteed-job-and-skills-training}}

We would also propose a guaranteed job and skills training program,
operating in conjunction with the Citizen's Income. For example we
propose taking around 250,000 people into full technical apprenticeships
each year.

There are several reasons why we propose these two in tandem:

\hypertarget{geographical}{%
\subsection{Geographical}\label{geographical}}

Citizens Dividend is a flat payment to every individual. The difficulty
with setting an amount is that it is hard to make it high enough for
London and low enough to be affordable

One option would be to have a variable Citizens Dividend based on
location. However this could encourage more pressure on housing in
London, thereby worsening housing problems.

If you base the income level on original residency, then you introduce a
sort of apartheid, in which neighbours may receive different Citizens
Dividend levels.

Unlike the Citizens Dividend, a guaranteed job and skills training
program can be applied geographically. It is more targeted.

\hypertarget{cost}{%
\subsection{Cost}\label{cost}}

Citizen's Dividend is intended as a low level payment, available to
everyone apart from temporary residents and tourists. Along with the
guaranteed job, everyone can be kept above the poverty line.
Individually, they will not be sufficient.

The guaranteed job is not likely to be taken up by everyone. The purpose
of the guaranteed job is to improve the skill level of people so that
they can get an economically viable job in a globalized marketplace. We
want to take people from being deskilled to highly skilled. The approach
is to combine skill training in something that the person enjoys with
real work experience in that area.

\hypertarget{tailoring}{%
\subsection{Tailoring}\label{tailoring}}

The system can be tailored to different types of people. For example,
prisoners, homeless people, young people and older people whose work no
longer exists have different requirements from a social welfare system.
Implementation would involve trialled schemes and schemes operating in
parallel. Local authorities can also be encouraged to set up their own
schemes. Best practice could be developed to ensure individual needs are
met. We would need a specific scheme for homeless people and disabled or
chronically ill people.

We propose that prisoners get the full amount. Whilst in prison they
would have access to the money to spend on provisions, then when they
leave they will have a lump sum to restart their lives and not be a
burden upon society. (If they die in prison the money cannot be passed
on to relatives). Young people up to16 years get half the adult amount
and those over 65 get 50\% more than the adult amount.

\hypertarget{compulsion}{%
\subsection{Compulsion}\label{compulsion}}

If you just had a workfare scheme, then poor people would be compelled
to take a job they didn't want. This kind of compulsion, as well as
being difficult to impose, can lead to wasted time and opportunity, with
people showing up for work but doing nothing. Rather than compelling
people to take any job, a work scheme should help people to discover
what they would like to do and assist them in that regard. To achieve
this, flexibility is required. In contrast to a monolithic single
scheme, we propose options for guaranteed jobs of different types which
would be optional.

\hypertarget{tailoring-jobs-to-skill-gaps}{%
\subsection{Tailoring jobs to skill
gaps}\label{tailoring-jobs-to-skill-gaps}}

Companies can give an idea of what skills are missing. If there is a
situation in which skills are missing, people can be provided with
combined training courses and work experience. In the beginning, there
will be more training than working and then more working than training
as individuals progress. Training will be targeted to particularly
deprived areas. The idea is to upskill people within a two month time
period, for lower skilled work. There would be conditionality attached
to payment, with possible bonuses for high performance.

\hypertarget{organisations-providing-jobs}{%
\subsection{Organisations providing
jobs}\label{organisations-providing-jobs}}

Three sectors will be active in providing jobs: government, companies
and charities. Charities could run schemes and charities that could be
unrelated to the problem of de-skilled unemployment could take on jobs.
The benefit of allowing charities to run schemes is that charities often
have a caring culture and attitude. This often provides an appropriate
work environment for those who have physical or mental illness or who
have been long-term unemployed.

There would be both providers of guaranteed job schemes and providers of
the jobs themselves. Most jobs should be combined work and skills and
may be affiliated with education providers. There would be no limit on
the number of times people can go through the scheme. People can pursue
more than one skills set if they so choose.

\hypertarget{entrepreneurship-and-networking}{%
\subsection{Entrepreneurship and
networking}\label{entrepreneurship-and-networking}}

The scheme should not discriminate against people who want to start
their own business. Entrepreneurship should be part of the core
training. Currently, whilst there is a lot of support for innovation,
there isn't much support for `non-innovative' businesses. For example,
China is good at supporting businesses which are not innovative, such as
corner shops and copy shops. Skill sharing and networking will also be a
part of the scheme. Once a database of skills is developed, people can
call on others in the network. This could be in the form of a voucher or
time banking system. Supplementary to this would be a system of CVs of
people who have been through or are currently in the program, which
could be useful for employers.

\hypertarget{creating-a-more-caring-society-and-building-local-communities}{%
\subsection{Creating a more caring society and building local
communities}\label{creating-a-more-caring-society-and-building-local-communities}}

Local authorities can use the scheme to get more funding. This will
contribute to a more caring society and promote the creation of more
`cathedrals' - projects which bring the community together.

\hypertarget{potential-issues-or-limitations-of-the-scheme}{%
\subsection{Potential issues or limitations of the
scheme}\label{potential-issues-or-limitations-of-the-scheme}}

Guaranteed jobs could displace existing workers. Some employers that
have people already could take the free labour and fire the people they
already have. This occurrence may be difficult to prevent. In the
worst-case scenario, people will be rotated through the skills program.

A high-skilled economy is inevitably more inflexible as it takes longer
to get particular skillsets. Computer technicians cannot easily retrain
as brain surgeons. Also, certain work is only suitable for those with
very high academic ability. This scheme would not be of great assistance
as regards those kinds of skills.

\newpage

\hypertarget{chapter-8-inequality-income-and-wealth}{%
\section{CHAPTER 8: INEQUALITY, INCOME AND
WEALTH}\label{chapter-8-inequality-income-and-wealth}}

\hypertarget{summary-2}{%
\subsection{Summary}\label{summary-2}}

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  When assessing inequality, we can consider whether it is harmful and
  whether it is justified.
\item
  People build material wealth through primary and secondary wealth
  creation. Primary wealth is money or property obtained through savings
  from wages or acquired through inheritance. Secondary wealth is
  generated by financial investment of primary wealth.
\item
  Those who have great wealth are able to grow it further through
  secondary wealth accumulation. Those without wealth (in particular
  those who pay rent) have too little income to allow investments. They
  may also see their savings potential decrease through wage stagnation
  and decreases in the real value of wages.
\item
  Piketty found that under capitalism, returns on financial capital
  wealth will tend to grow faster than wages. This implies a structural
  advantage for those who already have secondary wealth. One reason for
  this is pseudo-investments, ie investments in a financial but not
  economic sense - no real new wealth is created by them, rather they
  extract surplus from their users.
\item
  Wealthy people are able to put money into unfair pseudo-investments
  which do not lead to overall growth, such as land or monopolies.
\item
  Wealthy people also benefit unfairly from lowering of interest rates,
  leading to increases in asset values.
\item
  Britain has a severe wealth and income inequality problem.
\item
  Inequality is correlated with many social problems, such as higher
  crime rates, lower life expectancy, poor health outcomes, poor
  educational attainment, and lower social cohesion.
\item
  Inequality also poses risks for democratic representation and economic
  growth.
\item
  Judging from US data, people want a more equal society (more like
  Denmark).
\item
  Income tax has an important redistributive role. It is effective in
  reducing income inequality and the top 1\% income share.
\end{itemize}

\hypertarget{why-does-inequality-matter}{%
\section{8.1 Why does inequality
matter?}\label{why-does-inequality-matter}}

\newthought{Have you ever walked} through Knightsbridge in London, and
watched as expensive cars parked outside designer shops - even as
homeless people begged for spare change on the sidewalk nearby? That's a
clichéd image of inequality. The homelessness of some isn't caused by
the great wealth of others. However, stagnant working-class and
middle-class wages may well be. The greater problem in Britain is that a
propertied ownership class is taking a rising share of national income,
extracting rents from everyone else, and getting increasingly wealthy
whilst the majority are squeezed by higher monthly outlays on everything
from rents or mortgage payments to tuition fees for kids in college.

In this chapter, we will look at how wealth and income are distributed
in Britain. As we will see, the distribution is very unequal. We will
ask: Is it a problem that some have so much, while others have little?
What relationship is there between high incomes and wealth and
contributive merit? Do people really get what they deserve?

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}c@{}}
\toprule
\includegraphics{ChapterPictures/6-1-InequalityPic.jpg}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\emph{Figure 8.1 - A Street Scene In The UK}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

Many would say that extreme inequality is morally wrong, and should be
addressed through policy changes and stiff taxes on high incomes and
large amounts of accumulated wealth. Others might ask how this wealth
was acquired, and warn against discouraging productive activity. We
generally have a strong sense that if someone has worked hard for
something, then they have earned it and should be able to keep it. If
everyone has the same opportunity to build wealth, and rich people
gained their wealth through hard work, sacrifice, or ingenuity, we might
conclude that the rich deserve their wealth. That is, we would be
considering whether the wealth disparity is \emph{fair}, i.e.~gained in
reasonable proportion to contributive merit.

Aside from fairness, we also have to consider whether there may be
serious social ills associated with an excessively unequal distribution
of wealth. Does extreme inequality lead to undesirable outcomes for
people and society? Does it lead to social problems such as more crime,
poorer health, and shorter life expectancy? Is it a threat to
representative democracy? On the other hand, are there social benefits
to inequality - for example, does it encourage innovation and the
creation of new luxury goods which may eventually be enjoyed by the less
wealthy? Does it motivate economic growth? Such questions point us in
the direction of an assessment of potential \emph{harm} or
\emph{benefit}.

In evaluating the status quo, we must take a two-pronged approach:

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  Benefit or Harm: Consider whether there are benefits or social ills
  associated with disparities in wealth and income, aside from whether
  or not those disparities are fair and just.
\item
  Fairness: Consider how income is received and how wealth accumulates
  in private ownership in Britain. Then we can assess whether this
  wealth accumulation occurs via fair or unfair means, and in fair or
  unfair amounts.
\end{itemize}

Before making this assessment, we should take a step back. We have
talked about `wealth' and `riches' on the assumption that we all take
these words to mean the same things. In fact, the word `wealth' in its
common usage can refer to very different things. We break down our
interpretation of this in the next section.

\hypertarget{what-is-wealth}{%
\section{8.2 What is wealth?}\label{what-is-wealth}}

In its most broad sense, wealth refers to anything of value to people.
Based on this rather broad definition, `wealth' can refer to things
which are quite intangible. Social connections, charisma, political
influence, the rule of law and safety. These are all desirable, at least
to most people. People often use the term `wealth' to describe things
which are personal and irreplaceable, such as a family heirloom, or even
simply family or friends. Such things have little or no `exchange value'
(i.e.~they can't be sold, or at any rate can't be sold for any great
amount), but they may have a lot of value in personal and relational
terms.

Some things of great value are what we might term `social goods' because
they are not privately held by one person. Social goods may include
effective public transport, parks, clean air, a free press, and even a
feeling of community, or shared destiny. These are hugely important
kinds of wealth, even though they aren't privately held. They are part
of what economists call `the commons' or `common wealth.' A good example
is clean air. In a world in which the air was too toxic to breathe, the
rich might be able to afford to have air filters built into their homes
and cars, and benefit from much cleaner air than the non-rich. However,
such a world would entail a diminished life for everyone, including the
rich, as they would need to employ an expensive, energy-intensive
process to provide them with clean air, compared to simply having a
clean atmosphere which all could enjoy.

Another example is safety in South Africa. The degree of crime is so bad
that drivers regularly have their cars stolen while waiting at
stoplights. Wealthy people can avoid being the victims of crime by
locking themselves away in secure enclaves, surrounded by high walls and
security systems, and protected by private armed guards. The public
social good, that of public security, is lacking in South Africa. The
rich can protect themselves; the poor cannot. One reason may be a
less-than-effective police force, but the greater reason is that social
norms are distorted in the direction of criminality by widespread
desperate poverty and lack of hope for advancement through legal means.
Despite their relative privilege and safety, the wealthy still have a
diminished quality of life, resulting from restricted freedom of
movement and a fear of becoming a victim of crime.

Perversely, the fact that social goods are valued by everyone can put
them at risk in a way that is not the case for goods which are held
privately. This is because when people personally own wealth, they are
often very concerned about protecting it. People tend to be less
actively concerned about wealth held in common with others, as their
ties of benefit, provision, and accountability to the social good are
often less clear and tangible. Economists refer to this as the `tragedy
of the commons.'

It is `private wealth' that we are focusing on in this chapter, but we
mention social goods here because they are so important for quality of
life, and because as we shall see, inequality of private wealth is
linked with the loss of some of these social goods. More specifically,
we are narrowing ourselves to discussion of privately held material
wealth, thereby excluding immaterial or intangible forms of wealth. That
said, it is worth noting that having material wealth often enables
attainment of immaterial goods of great value. For example, a materially
wealthy person may buy access to a top school for their child, which
provides that child with access to a good education and good social
connections that are likely to lead to lucrative and powerful career
opportunities later in life. Similarly, paid entry into expensive elite
social clubs offers valuable networking opportunities. Material wealth
can buy time, unique experiences, unpaid internships, physical
attractiveness (to an extent), and worryingly, it can also buy wildly
disproportionate political influence (look at Rupert Murdoch). Perhaps
the only thing material wealth can't directly buy is love and happiness
- though many will still try.

\hypertarget{how-do-people-build-material-wealth}{%
\subsection{How do people build material
wealth?}\label{how-do-people-build-material-wealth}}

There are many ways, both legal and illegal, but we will confine
ourselves here to the most significant legal means:

\textbf{Wages}

Wages are an income earned through some form of economic activity, such
as working as an employee or a self-employed trader, or creating
something and selling it. People who earn just enough income to meet
their needs won't build up much wealth through savings. High rents on
flats in crowded cities - the very places where most of the jobs are -
have made it very difficult for most people to save any money at all in
contemporary Britain. Only a minority of people blessed with a very high
income and low living costs can build up wealth from savings of a
portion of their income - perhaps enough to make some financial
investments.

\textbf{Inheritance}

Some people gain wealth through inheritance, or by dint of a gift from
wealthy relations. Great family wealth can be passed down and increased
over many generations.

\textbf{Theft or illegal trading}

In a good many cases, an individual or family acquired its initial
wealth pool by illegal means - for example, family members may have
taken bribes or kickbacks whilst occupying high government office, or
may have sold illegal drugs or weapons. Does this seem unlikely in
contemporary Britain? Perhaps - but consider that it is routine in most
countries of the world, and enormous amounts of wealth obtained through
such means by foreigners has been `invested' in Britain, for example in
expensive London or Oxfordshire real estate.

\textbf{Dumb luck}

In still other cases, a person might acquire significant wealth by
simple luck. In a very few cases, this might involve buying a winning
lottery ticket. In far more cases, it might entail having bought London
real estate inexpensively forty or fifty years ago, and now sitting on a
property valuated at more than ten times what it had been when it was
purchased.

\textbf{Entrepreneurship}

In some cases, a person with no money but a lot of energy and talent
might be able to persuade an angel investor (and later on, some venture
capitalists) to invest in a company startup that produces some novel
good or service. If the entrepreneur manages to make a success of the
business, and retains a large equity stake, that might suffice to
catapult him or her from wage-taking employee status into the wealthy
proprietarial class.

The above five ways in which people first acquire significant wealth
might be termed `primary wealth attainment' (Karl Marx called it
``primitive accumulation'').

Once a person has some wealth, there are myriad ways in which to deploy
it so as to increase one's wealth further. This can be called `secondary
wealth accumulation' and includes the following actions, among others:

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  Investing in companies by buying stocks and shares or some other
  financial instrument. If the company does well, then the investor will
  increase his or her wealth through dividends, or by selling the stock
  when it has higher value.
\item
  Investing in savings products such as mutual funds (which invest on a
  person's behalf) that pay interest.
\item
  Buying land or property and selling it once it has increased in value
  (possibly also receiving rent income in the meantime).
\item
  Investing directly in a business that produces some good or service.
\end{itemize}

From the above list, it's easy to see how those who are already rich can
get a lot richer. They don't have to build up wealth through labour or
invention. Owning wealth opens up a raft of secondary wealth generation
and accumulation opportunities, and it allows one to take bigger
financial risks. The wealthy are also likelier to invest their riches
profitably because they can afford to pay advisors and wealth managers
to locate investment opportunities and to minimise tax liabilities on
their behalf.

Are advantages like these really enough to propel the rich into
ever-increasing rates of wealth-accumulation? Yes. Ever-increasing
global inequality suggests that this is indeed the case. (OECD
\protect\hyperlink{ref-OECD2015}{2015}) Let's take a look at the extent
of wealth and income inequality in Britain today.

\hypertarget{inequality-of-wealth}{%
\section{8.3 Inequality of wealth}\label{inequality-of-wealth}}

\hypertarget{the-british-context}{%
\subsection{The British Context}\label{the-british-context}}

There is a serious level of wealth inequality in Britain today.
According to the figures from the Office of National Statistics from
2012 to 2014, the richest 10\% of UK households hold 45\% of all wealth,
while the poorest 50\% own just 8.7\% (ONS
\protect\hyperlink{ref-ONS2015}{2015}\protect\hyperlink{ref-ONS2015}{a}).

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}c@{}}
\toprule
\includegraphics{ChapterPictures/6-2-DistributionOfHouseholdWealth.png}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\emph{Figure 8.2: Distribution of Household Wealth}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

Particularly striking is the fact that the richest five families in the
UK are wealthier than the bottom 20\% of the population (Dransfield
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Dransfield2014}{2014}).

Here are a few notable facts about the UK wealth distribution:

\begin{itemize}
\item
  Bottom 10\% of households have total wealth of £12,550 or less.
\item
  Median total household wealth is £225,000.
\item
  The top 10\% of households have a total wealth of over £1m.
\item
  The top 1\% of households have a total wealth of £2.87m+.
\end{itemize}

The below chart shows the distribution in a finer grain, allowing us to
see the share of wealth held by the top 1\% in British society (ONS
\protect\hyperlink{ref-ONSWELLBEING2015}{2015}\protect\hyperlink{ref-ONSWELLBEING2015}{b}).

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}c@{}}
\toprule
\includegraphics{ChapterPictures/6-3-HouseholdWealthDistribution.png}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\emph{Figure 8.3: Household Wealth Distribution by percentile
(2015)}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

The intensity of wealth inequality continues to increase. The richest
10\% are getting richer not only in absolute terms, but also in terms of
their percentage share of total wealth and total income.

\hypertarget{the-role-of-property}{%
\subsection{The Role of Property}\label{the-role-of-property}}

ONS figures from 2012-14 show that while the total proportion of wealth
held by the top 1\% remained steady at 13\%, the next 9 per cent richest
households, increased their share to 31.2 per cent of total wealth. This
was up from 30.1 per cent two years previously.

The inequality increase occurred entirely in net property wealth, during
a period of house price rises (ONS
\protect\hyperlink{ref-ONSWELLBEING2015}{2015}\protect\hyperlink{ref-ONSWELLBEING2015}{b}).
This indicates that a large part of the growing wealth of the richest
10\% in Britain is due to their ownership of property, rather than wage
income or business income.

A 2014 Credit Suisse report confirmed these findings. They found that
the top 10\% in the UK have become wealthier since the financial crisis
because of value increases in assets. They also showed that Britain is
the only country in the G7 group of leading economies where inequality
has increased this century. (Treanor and Farrell
\protect\hyperlink{ref-TreanorFarrell2014}{2014})

\hypertarget{inequality-of-income}{%
\section{8.4 Inequality of income}\label{inequality-of-income}}

We have discussed wealth inequality, which is the vast discrepancy in
the ownership of assets, such as property, cash and investments, held
across Britain. There also exists a less severe, but also worrying form
of inequality. This is inequality of income.

Income may come from a variety of sources, such as interest on savings,
wages, dividends, cash benefits (such as State benefits), and rental
income. Some of this income may be taxed. Measures of income inequality
generally consider inequality in disposable incomes (after benefits and
after direct taxes). The below flow-chart shows the various stages of
household income:

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics{OtherPictures/IncomeAfterTaxes2.png}
\caption{Image}
\end{figure}

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}c@{}}
\toprule
\endhead
\emph{Figure 8.4: Household Income after Tax, Benefits and
Housing}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

Disposable income may be measured before-housing-costs (BHC) or
after-housing-costs (AHC). When considering income, it is important to
be precise about the kind of income being discussed. For example, when
looking at income inequality, we can see that there is more inequality
in income after-housing-costs than in income before-housing-costs,
because poorer households tend to spend a higher share of their income
on housing than those higher up the income distribution (McGuinness
\protect\hyperlink{ref-McGuinness2016}{2016}).

In the chart below (IFS \protect\hyperlink{ref-IFS2014}{2014}), we can
see how the share of pre-tax household income going to the top 1\% has
increased over time.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}c@{}}
\toprule
\includegraphics{ChapterPictures/6-4-ShareOfTopIncome.png}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\emph{Figure 8.5: Share of top \% pre-tax income in the
UK}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

The top incomes of the top 1\% appear to be `racing away' from the
remaining 99\%. Data suggests that income inequality within the bottom
99\% is remaining reasonably stable or possibly slightly decreasing,
while the national income share of the top 1\% is increasing.

There exists, of course, a relationship between income inequality and
wealth inequality. Income leads to wealth when it is saved up and when
it is used to buy assets. Wealth also generates income as shares
generate dividends, savings generate interest, and property ownership
generates rental income.

Households with great wealth often also receive high incomes. However we
can easily imagine someone who has great wealth in the form of property,
investments, and bank balance, but who has little income (perhaps a
retiree). Similarly, someone may make a significant income, but have
debts and high outgoings, so they don't build up wealth (perhaps a young
person on a high salary). The effect of a sudden reduction in income or
unexpected expenses would have a dramatically different effect on each
of them.

Broadly speaking, we have seen:

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  Wealth distribution in the UK is very unequal and getting more so.
\item
  Income distribution is also very unequal, but less so than wealth
  distribution.
\item
  The top 1\% income share is increasing quickly.
\item
  Wealthy people tend to be on high incomes. Those with little wealth
  tend to be on low incomes.
\end{itemize}

Understanding the above graphs and figures requires us to look behind
the figures and consider how different groups earn and use their income.
At the lower end, there are those who earn their income through labour,
and who must pay housing costs. They have very little disposable income
and are unlikely to have much income available to invest in secondary
wealth generation. They may have seen their nominal wages stagnating
(Khan \protect\hyperlink{ref-Khan2016}{2016}), while the real value of
their wages decreases (Tily \protect\hyperlink{ref-Tily2016}{2016}). At
the other extreme are those who have high incomes and are able to make
additional income through purchasing assets. As we have seen, increases
in asset values (particularly property assets) have driven an increase
in the wealth of the very rich. With assets comes income through
dividends, rent, and capital gains. This appears to be contributing to
growing inequality of both wealth and income.

Quoted in the Financial Times, the general secretary of the Trade Union
Congress, Frances O'Grady, put it this way:

\begin{quote}
\emph{``The economy is paying people too little for hard work and too
much just for sitting on wealth. It is making Britain more and more
unequal, with those who are already rich moving even further ahead of
the typical family (Giles \protect\hyperlink{ref-Giles2015}{2015}).''}
\end{quote}

\hypertarget{effects-of-inequality}{%
\section{8.5 Effects of inequality}\label{effects-of-inequality}}

But is this inequality in itself really such a problem? If we could
ensure that all citizens have their basic wants covered, does it matter
if the rich are getting richer? Surely dealing with absolute wealth in
this way and ensuring a basic standard of living is a more important
focus than the relative wealth between rich and poor?

It is clear that there is a strong view amongst some circles that
inequality is not a problem as long as the poorest have their basic
needs met.

High wealth and income inequality matter for a host of reasons. It
causes subtly damaging changes in the way people interact with each
other and participate in society. According to the Equality Trust,
income inequality is correlated with low civic participation, lower
voter turnout, and lower levels of cultural activity (The Equality Trust
\protect\hyperlink{ref-EqualityTrust2014}{2014}). There is even evidence
that inequality may affect personality (The Equality Trust
\protect\hyperlink{ref-EqualityTrust2017}{2017}). Research comparing US
states found, despite adjusting findings for state and person-level
socio-demographic factors, that people in less-equal states were `less
agreeable' than those in more-equal states (Vries, Gosling, and Potter
\protect\hyperlink{ref-DeVries2011}{2011}).

A World Bank study on inequality and crime rates reported a strong
correlation between violent crime and inequality, both within and
between countries.

\hypertarget{inequality-and-empathy}{%
\subsection{Inequality and Empathy}\label{inequality-and-empathy}}

Psychologist Paul Piff has conducted research (Piff et al.
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Piff2010}{2010}) on a phenomenon called the
`empathy gap'. In his experiments, test subjects were artificially
placed into social hierarchies. Piff and his colleagues concluded that
increased wealth and status in society leads to increased focus on
oneself. This, in turn, leads to decreased compassion, altruism, and
ethical behavior. The opposite is also true. Piff's work suggests that
poorer individuals tend to be more generous, charitable, trusting and
helpful, compared with their richer counterparts. A related study by
Keltner et al, found that `lower-class individuals' displayed more
compassion and sensitivity to the distress of others than their
upper-class counterparts (Stellar et al.
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Stellar2012}{2012}).

Social class and wealth, therefore, appear to be negatively correlated
with qualities like compassion and empathy. This may be exacerbated by
increasing physical segregation in where the rich and poor live. Poor,
rich, and average households became less and less likely to live next
door to one another between 1970 and 2000 (Dorling, Daniel
\protect\hyperlink{ref-DorlingDaniel2007}{2007}) suggesting that
socioeconomic polarisation has been accompanied by geographical
segregation.

Surprisingly, there is even evidence that inequality may affect
personality. Research in the USA compared less equal US states with more
equal states. After adjusting for state and person-level
socio-demographic factors, de Vries et al found that people in less
equal states were `less agreeable' than in more equal states.

\hypertarget{inequality-and-social-problems}{%
\subsection{Inequality and Social
Problems}\label{inequality-and-social-problems}}

Epidemiologists Wilson and Pickett collated a breadth of transnational
research comparing inequality and a variety of social measures. Their
results were striking. They found that over a wide range of areas,
including health, education, social mobility, social cohesion and
foreign aid, increased inequality leads to worse outcomes. See, for
example, their findings below, comparing health and social problems with
income inequality, across rich countries (Wilkinson and Pickett
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Wilkinson2017}{2017}). We can see that the US is
highest in income inequality and highest in health and social problems.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}c@{}}
\toprule
\begin{minipage}[b]{0.97\columnwidth}\centering
\includegraphics{ChapterPictures/6-5-Healthandsocialproblems.png}\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.97\columnwidth}\centering
\emph{Figure 8.6: Health and social problems related to inequality
within rich countries}\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

\footnote{Wilson and Pickett's research has been criticised on the basis
  that their findings show relationships of correlation, rather than
  causation. However the researchers note that many of the causal
  processes linking inequality with social problems are well established
  from other research. They argue that the key insight from their work
  is that the connection can be seen repeatedly in countries worldwide.}

Their message for policy-makers was plain:

\begin{quote}
\emph{``(A) clear warning for those who might want to place low public
expenditure and taxation at the top of their priorities. If you fail to
avoid high inequality, you will need more prisons and more police. You
will have to deal with higher rates of mental illness, drug abuse, and
every other kind of problem. If keeping taxes and benefits down leads to
wider income differences, the need to deal with ensuing social ills may
force you to raise public expenditure to cope.''}(Wilkinson and Pickett
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Wilkinson2010}{2010})
\end{quote}

\hypertarget{inequality-and-crime-rates}{%
\subsection{Inequality and Crime
Rates}\label{inequality-and-crime-rates}}

In a study on inequality and crime rates, Lederman et al.~found a strong
correlation between violent crime and inequality (Lederman, Fajnzylber,
and Loayza \protect\hyperlink{ref-Lederman2002}{2002}), both within and
between countries. In their view:

\emph{``The correlation reflects causation from inequality to crime
rates, even correcting for other crime determinants.''}

Simply put, this means that inequality causes high crime rates, not vice
versa. The mechnism by which this occurs is unclear and may be
multifactored. Economic inequality may curtail opportunities for some,
leading to feelings of hopelessness, inferiority, and fear which then
lead to violence. Inequality may encourage social competition, and low
levels of trust and community cohesion within a society.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}c@{}}
\toprule
\begin{minipage}[b]{0.97\columnwidth}\centering
\includegraphics{ChapterPictures/6-6-IneqLift.jpg}\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.97\columnwidth}\centering
\emph{Figure 8.7: Cartoon showing the relationship between income
inequality and social mobility}\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

There is also a strong correlation between high income inequality and
low social mobility. Social mobility is the upward or downward movement
of people between social strata in a society. Mobility may be
intra-generational (i.e within a generation, as per `rags to riches'
stories), or it may be inter-generational, i.e a change in social status
from parents to children.

In an intergenerational study of the American context by researcher
Corak, it was observed that high earnings inequality is likely to be
associated with stagnation in intergenerational mobility. This means
that earnings inequality makes societies more `sticky,' such that
children are more likely to stay in the same social stratum as their
parents.

Corak cautions that this outcome is particularly likely if labour market
inequalities translate into political power, which then influences
whether progressive policy reforms are made. He warns,

\begin{quote}
\emph{``Without changes in these underlying factors, the transmission of
inequality from the current generation to the next will remain a movie
that is played to the same script as that viewed by past generations.''
} (Miles Corak \protect\hyperlink{ref-MilesCorak2011}{2011})
\end{quote}

Figure 8.8 shows the strong correlation between inequality and a measure
called `intergenerational earnings elasticity' (IEE), which is used by
social scientists when considering intergenerational social mobility.
IEE is the percentage difference in earnings in the child's generation
associated with the percentage difference in the parental generation
(Miles Corak \protect\hyperlink{ref-MilesCorak2011}{2011}). An
intergenerational elasticity in earnings of 0.9, for example, means that
if father A makes 100\% more money than father B, then the son of father
A will, as an adult, earn 90\% more than the son of father B. An
elasticity of 0.2 says this 100\% difference between the two fathers
would only lead to a 20\% difference between the sons.

The lower the elasticity, the more mobility in the society. Figure 2.5
shows that increased inequality at any point in time is correlated with
lower generational earnings mobility. Note that mobility can be in
either direction, up or down. The IEE is simply considering the earnings
difference between generations.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}c@{}}
\toprule
\includegraphics{ChapterPictures/6-7-IntergenerationalEarningsElasticity.png}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\emph{Figure 8.7: Intergenerational earnings elasticity}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

This chart is widely known as the `Gatsby Curve'. It is so named after
the character of Jay Gatsby in the famous novel by F. Scott Fitzgerald.
In the novel, Jay Gatsby tries in vain to raise his social standing by
becoming very rich. The novel is set in the 1920s, when there was high
inequality of wealth and very low social mobility.

One suggested reason for the correlation between inequality and
intergenerational earnings mobility is unequal access to educational
opportunities. This is exacerbated by poor social and family
relationships, which then inhibit learning. The below image is from a
1916 advertisement for a vocational school, and suggests that education
is a pathway to upward social mobility.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}c@{}}
\toprule
\begin{minipage}[b]{0.97\columnwidth}\centering
\includegraphics{ChapterPictures/6-8-AdvertisementPromotingEducation.png}\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.97\columnwidth}\centering
\emph{Figure 8.9: Advertisement promoting education as a route to upward
mobility}\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

These findings offer insights into how intergenerational poverty and
welfare dependency have a real structural basis, and are not entirely
within the control of an individual's willingness, effort, or merit.

\hypertarget{inequality-and-liberty}{%
\subsection{Inequality and Liberty}\label{inequality-and-liberty}}

If we accept the evidence that economic inequality lead to negative
social outcomes, might we nevertheless also argue that inequality is a
necessary and inevitable outcome of a free society and equality before
the law? In his book `The Constitution of Liberty', political
philosopher Fredrich Hayek argued:

\begin{quote}
\emph{``From the fact that people are very different it follows that, if
we treat them equally, the result must be inequality in their actual
position, and that the only way to place them in an equal position would
be to treat them differently. Equality before the law and material
equality are therefore not only different but are in conflict with each
other; and we can achieve either one or the other, but not both at the
same time.''}
\end{quote}

Hayek also argues that an attempt to achieve complete material equality
between people can only come at the expense of freedom:

\begin{quote}
\emph{``While an equality of rights under a limited government is
possible and an essential condition of individual freedom, a claim for
equality of material position can be met only by a government with
totalitarian powers.''} (Hayek \protect\hyperlink{ref-Hayek1944}{1944})
\end{quote}

One response would be to say that in objecting to extremes of
inequality, one is not advocating strict equality of outcome for all.

The obvious problem with Hayek's argument is that distribution according
to merit is just one conception of social justice. Consider the
principles of fair equality of opportunity, and the societal goal of
raising the lowest social position as much as possible. We propose that
extreme inequality needs to be eliminated to create a level playing
field where individuals are given the opportunity to demonstrate their
merit (Lister \protect\hyperlink{ref-Lister2011}{2011}).

\hypertarget{wealth-inequality-and-the-democratic-process}{%
\subsection{Wealth Inequality and the Democratic
Process}\label{wealth-inequality-and-the-democratic-process}}

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}c@{}}
\toprule
\includegraphics{ChapterPictures/6-9-WealthIneqDemocracy.jpg}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\emph{Figure 8.10: Cartoon showing wealth inequality in the democratic
process}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

Despite Hayek's famous theory on the constitution of liberty, a very
real danger of wealth inequality is the threat to the democratic
process. Extremes of wealth mean that those at the top, whether they be
corporations (as per the above cartoon) or individuals, have
disproportionate access to power, and an ability to influence
politicians for their own interests. A famous quotation, attributed to
noted American Supreme Court Judge Louis D. Brandeis, put it simply:

\begin{quote}
\emph{``We can have democracy in this country or we can have great
wealth concentrated in the hands of a few, but we cannot have both.''}
(Dillard \protect\hyperlink{ref-Dillard1904}{1904})
\end{quote}

There is strong evidence that extremes of wealth inequality lead to
so-called `representational inequality.' Work by Professor Martin Gilens
of Princeton University found that in the US, when the policy
preferences of the affluent differ from those of the middle-class or
poor, there is virtually no relationship between policy outcomes and the
desires of less advantaged groups (Gilens et al.
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Gilens2004}{2004}). Policies favored by 20
percent of affluent Americans have about a one-in-five chance of being
adopted, while those favored by 80 percent of affluent Americans are
adopted about half the time. In contrast, the support or opposition of
the poor or the middle class has no impact on a policy's prospects of
being adopted (Gilens \protect\hyperlink{ref-Gilens2012}{2012}).

Economist Dabla-Norris notes in a 2015 IMF report (Dabla-Norris et al.
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Dabla-Norris2015}{2015}) that income inequality
can have serious consequences for political stability, saying:

\begin{quote}
\emph{``Widening inequality also has significant implications for growth
and macroeconomic stability, it can concentrate political and decision
making power in the hands of a few, lead to a suboptimal use of human
resources, cause investment-reducing political and economic instability,
and raise crisis risk.''}
\end{quote}

\hypertarget{inequality-and-growth}{%
\subsection{Inequality and Growth}\label{inequality-and-growth}}

Some would argue that inequality is nevertheless necessary for economic
growth. Inequality is thought by some to encourage entrepreneurialism
(Matthews \protect\hyperlink{ref-Matthews2016}{2016}) and the wealthy
are thought to invest in the economy. It is also claimed that when the
state redistributes wealth through taxation and benefits, resources are
lost through administration and bureaucracy. However, recent research by
the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD)
suggests that even this purely economic argument is on shaky ground. Its
2014 analysis found that high levels of income inequality have a
statistically significant negative impact on growth.

The study found that:

\begin{quote}
\emph{``Rising inequality is estimated to have knocked more than 4
percentage points off growth in half of the (OECD) countries over two
decades. On the other hand, greater equality prior to the crisis helped
GDP per capita in a few countries, notably Spain.''} (OECD
\protect\hyperlink{ref-OE2014}{2014})
\end{quote}

Furthermore, while there is evidence that the promise of wealth is a
strong motivator for entrepreneurs, the majority of the top 1\% in the
US are not entrepreneurs - they are executives, managers, supervisors,
and financial professionals (Bakija, Cole, and Heim
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Bakija2012}{2012}).

These findings reinforce the work of Piketty on inequality and `low
growth capitalism.'

In this section, we have considered the effects of inequality in terms
of its impact on empathy, social problems, crime rates, and social
mobility. Contrary to claims that income and wealth inequality are
necessary for liberty and growth, we see evidence that inequality
threatens a functional democracy and growing economy.

\hypertarget{how-much-inequality-do-people-want-in-society}{%
\section{8.6 How much inequality do people want in
society?}\label{how-much-inequality-do-people-want-in-society}}

We've seen above that income inequality and wealth inequality are
associated with very undesirable social consequences. However, most
would not welcome an economic system in which everyone received exactly
the same amount. There has been some research from the US as to what
distribution of wealth people believe there should be in society.

In a 2011 study by Dan Ariely and Michael Norton (Ariely and Norton
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Norton2011}{2011}), a nationally representative
online panel of Americans were asked to estimate the current
distribution of wealth in the USA, and to describe a distribution they
deemed `just'. The results were striking. All demographic groups
(including Republicans and the wealthy) desired a more equal
distribution than the actual US wealth distribution. Secondly, all
groups vastly underestimated wealth inequality in the US, estimating
that the top quintile held about 59\% rather than the actual amount of
about 84\%.

The below chart shows the distribution which the participants estimated
was the case, the participants' ideal distribution, and the actual US
wealth distribution. We can see that the participants' estimated
distribution is as far from the actual distribution as their ideal
distribution is from their estimated distribution of wealth inequality
in the US.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}c@{}}
\toprule
\begin{minipage}[b]{0.97\columnwidth}\centering
\includegraphics{ChapterPictures/6-10-UnitedStatesWealthDistributionActualEstimatedandIdeal.png}\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.97\columnwidth}\centering
\emph{Figure 8.11: United States wealth distribution - Actual, Estimated
and Ideal as surveyed}\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

The researchers concluded two main points. First, that a large,
nationally representative sample of Americans seems to prefer to live in
a country more like Sweden than like the United States. Americans also
construct ideal distributions that are far more equal than they
estimated the United States to be - estimates which themselves were far
more equal than the actual level of inequality.

Second, there was much more consensus than disagreement across groups
from different sides of the political spectrum about this desire for a
more equal distribution of wealth, suggesting that Americans may possess
a commonly held ``normative'' standard for the distribution of wealth
despite the many disagreements about policies that affect that
distribution, such as taxation and welfare.

In short:

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  Americans think the US is more equal than it is, and
\item
  Americans would like the US to be even more equal than they think it
  is (more like Sweden)
\item
  This preference held across the political spectrum.
\end{itemize}

\hypertarget{is-income-inequality-merited}{%
\section{8.7 Is income inequality
merited?}\label{is-income-inequality-merited}}

We have now seen that inequality is associated with significant social
ills, such as increased crime rates and poor health and longevity
outcomes. We have also seen that it may pose a real threat to
representative democracy and to economic growth. So, there is clear
evidence of harm or potential harm arising from excessive wealth
inequality in Britain.

What about fairness? Has the wealth of the very rich been accumulated
through fair means? Remember again the ways of accumulating wealth which
we discussed in the beginning of this chapter. There was primary wealth
acquisition, occurring through income from legal or illegal economic
activity or inheritance. There was also secondary wealth acquisition
which involved putting wealth to use in the form of investment, to
accumulate more wealth. We said that if the rich are rich because they
work hard and `work smart' and the poor are poor because they do not,
then that might be one reason for viewing wealth inequality as fair.

\hypertarget{inequality-due-to-income-or-inheritance}{%
\subsection{Inequality due to Income or
Inheritance}\label{inequality-due-to-income-or-inheritance}}

When it comes to those primary forms of wealth acquisition, we know that
unfairness exists. It would be wonderful if everyone had an elderly aunt
who could leave them a sizeable inheritance, but that is clearly not the
case. Some people have friends who help them get a high-paying job, some
do not. Some people go to excellent schools, some do not. Some work, no
matter how important to society, pays less than other work. These kinds
of unfairness are difficult to tackle, raise many ethical issues, and
are outside the scope of this book. However, it is worth mentioning that
the world is not a level playing field and while attempts can be made
(through inheritance tax and affirmative action policy) to redress
unfairness of opportunity to gain primary wealth, attempts to totally
eradicate it would probably be futile. They would also probably have
serious unintended consequences. As your parent may have told you when
you were a child, `sometimes life just isn't fair.'

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}c@{}}
\toprule
\includegraphics{ChapterPictures/6-11-InheritanceCartoon.jpg}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\emph{Figure 8.12: Cartoon showing Inheritance as a wider social
problem}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

To what extent is someone's monetary success due to their own work, and
to what extent is it their luck or privilege (in terms of genes, or
parental support), or a product of the wider society? And to what extent
should we reward those who seek money over other objectives?

Income taxation is one of the main ways in which the government affects
income distribution across society. From a purely philosophical point of
view, it's not easy to determine what the rate of income tax should be.
We'll come back to this in the next chapter, when we look at this
through the prism of income inequality and recent historical experience.
We'll also consider the fairness of different processes of wealth
accumulation.

\hypertarget{direct-taxes-and-their-redistributive-role}{%
\section{8.8 Direct taxes and their redistributive
role}\label{direct-taxes-and-their-redistributive-role}}

\hypertarget{income-tax-in-the-uk}{%
\subsection{Income Tax in the UK}\label{income-tax-in-the-uk}}

Most people, when they think of tax, immediately think of income tax. It
is possibly the most noticeably intrusive tax in every individual's
life, requiring, as it does, the keeping of records, the filling in of
forms, and possible sanctions from the `tax man.' Unlike VAT, which is
added to goods and services we purchase, income tax comes out of our
earnings. There is often an added feeling of grievance associated with
the sense that the government is taking money for which we have worked
very hard.

Income tax is progressive, with different rates of tax payable according
to income. These rates are called `Bands.' As of 2016, each individual
is entitled to a'personal allowance' of £11,000 of non-taxable income.
Above this, their income is taxable. Taxable income (i.e.~income above
the personal allowance) is subject to different tax rates depending upon
the band within which it falls. The table below summarises the income
tax bands and rates.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}llll@{}}
\toprule
Band & Rate & Income after allowances 2016/17 & Income after allowances
2015/16\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\href{http://www.gov.uk/apply-tax-free-interest-on-savings/10-savings-rate}{Starting
rate for savings} & 10\% (0\% for 2015/16) & Up to £5,000 & Up to
£5,000\tabularnewline
Basic rate & 20\% & Up to £32,000 & Up to £31,785\tabularnewline
Higher rate & 40\% & £32,001 to £150,000 & £31,786 to
£150,000\tabularnewline
Additional rate & 45\% & Over £150000 & Over £150000\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

The current top marginal tax rate is 45\%. The below chart shows how top
marginal tax rates have changed over time for different countries. We
can see that the top tax rate for the UK was very high during the Second
World War and in the late 1970s. The top rate dropped sharply during the
prime ministership of Margaret Thatcher in the 1980s.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}c@{}}
\toprule
\includegraphics{ChapterPictures/6-12-TopIncomeMTR.png}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\emph{Figure 8.13: Top Income Marginal Tax Rate}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

\hypertarget{the-effect-of-uk-taxes-on-income-inequality}{%
\subsection{The Effect of UK Taxes on Income
Inequality}\label{the-effect-of-uk-taxes-on-income-inequality}}

Direct taxes (e.g.~Income tax, National Insurance Contributions) act to
reduce inequality of income. Wealthier households pay higher amounts of
direct tax and a higher proportion of their income in direct taxes. They
are \emph{progressive} taxes.

The below chart shows the effect which the combination of tax and
benefits have on income inequality (Wells and Thomas,
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Wells}{n.d.}). The y-axis is the degree of
inequality as measured by the `Gini coefficient'.\footnote{A higher Gini
  value represents a less equal society, with 100\% meaning one person
  has all the income, and 0 meaning everyone has the same} The blue line
is the level of income inequality before taxation and benefit
distribution.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}c@{}}
\toprule
\includegraphics{ChapterPictures/6-13-ImpactTBIneq.png}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\emph{Figure 8.14: Impact of tax and benefits on income
inequality}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

According to these ONS figures in 2014/15, the richest fifth of the
population paid 22.8\% of their gross income on direct taxes. The
majority of this was income tax. The average tax bill for the poorest
fifth was 11\% of their gross income. The majority of this was from
Council tax.

In 2014/15, after direct taxes, the average incomes of the richest fifth
of households was five and a half times that of the poorest fifth
(£67,000 and £12,300 per year respectively).

Income tax made up the largest proportion of direct tax paid by the
richest fifth of the population. Income tax is the most progressive of
the direct taxes and thus has the biggest effect on reducing income
inequality. The below chart compares the progressivity of income tax,
National Insurance Contributions and Council Tax. A positive value
indicates progressivity.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}c@{}}
\toprule
\includegraphics{ChapterPictures/6-14-IncomeProgressivityTax.png}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\emph{Figure 8.15: Income progressivity for various tax
types}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

Despite fluctuation, there is a clear overall trend towards increased
progressivity.

\hypertarget{using-income-tax-to-reduce-income-inequality}{%
\subsection{Using Income Tax To Reduce Income
Inequality}\label{using-income-tax-to-reduce-income-inequality}}

Earlier, we discussed the top 1\%, and evidence that their share of
total income is racing away from the share of the other 99\%. The below
chart shows how the income share of the top 1\% correlates with top
marginal tax rates in the USA.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}c@{}}
\toprule
\includegraphics{ChapterPictures/6-15-CorrelationIncomeSharesAndMTR.png}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\emph{Figure 8.16: Correlation between top 1\% income shares and top
MTR}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

Immediately we can see a strong oppositional relationship, whereby a
high marginal tax rate is generally correlated with a lower income
share. So again, in the roaring 20s, we have a lower top marginal tax
rate of about 25\%, and the income share of the top 1\% reaching a
height of around 23\%. During the depression of the 1930s and the Second
World War, there was an increase in the top marginal tax rate and a
severe reduction in the top 1\% income share. During the 1980s, another
drop in the top marginal tax rate and and an increase in the top 1\%
income share once more. So, this suggests a strong direct relationship
between an increase in top marginal tax rates and a decrease in the top
1\% income share.

The pattern is also evident if we compare different countries. The below
chart shows the top tax rate and 1\% share for a variety of countries in
2004-2008.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}c@{}}
\toprule
\includegraphics{ChapterPictures/6-16-TopShareTopMTR.jpg}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\emph{Figure 8.17: Top 1\% share and top MTR for various countries in
2004-8}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

Again the top marginal tax rate appears to have an inverse relationship
with top 1\% income share. Those with the lowest 1\% income share are
the Nordic countries, with top marginal tax rates of between 55 and
60\%. The UK and US, with lower top marginal tax rates of 40\% and
under, are also among the highest in 1\% income share. There are
anomalies, however, which indicate that top marginal tax rate is not the
only factor contributing to the 1\% income share. Germany is a bit of an
outlier, perhaps due to tax deductions.

So, we conclude by arguing that firstly, the progressivity of income tax
is welcome; and that a top marginal rate of around 60\% is probably
necessary to keep a moderate and stable income and wealth share of the
top 1\%. Reforming deductions and other complexities that the rich can
exploit is another possible area of focus.

\hypertarget{income-tax-the-details}{%
\section{8.9 Income tax: The details}\label{income-tax-the-details}}

Income tax is paid on income, which can include money earned from
employment or self-employment, state benefits, some pensions, rental
income, investment income, income from trusts, and work benefits. Some
income is exempt from tax - for example interest on savings in
tax-exempt accounts.

\hypertarget{how-is-it-paid}{%
\subsection{How is it paid?}\label{how-is-it-paid}}

There are several ways in which income tax is paid, which vary according
to whether the taxpayer is an employee, self-employed, and/or in receipt
of benefits. There is generally no minimum age for paying most income
taxes - therefore even children who receive income over the tax-free
threshold will be required to pay tax.

\textbf{Employees}

Employees in Britain have income tax taken out of their pay packet
before they are paid their wages. This is called Pay As You Earn (PAYE).
Employers determine the tax payable by using the employee's tax code.
This is a code which HMRC gives each taxpayer for tax assessment
purposes, and which delineates their income tax bracket.

\textbf{State benefits}

Those whose only income is state benefits may not have to pay any tax.
In some cases, HMRC will require those on state benefits to submit a
self-assessment tax return. This is a form (available online or in paper
form) which stipulates an individual's income and is used by HMRC to
calculate tax owed. The table below shows which benefits are taxable and
which are not.

\textbf{Self-employed}

Those who are self-employed, such those those operating as a sole
trader, will be required to register as self-employed and submit
self-assessment tax returns.

\textbf{Foreign Income}

In some cases, a person may be required to pay tax on foreign income.
This is income from outside England, Scotland, Wales, or Northern
Ireland. Whether a person is required to pay tax on foreign income will
depend on whether they are considered `resident in the UK' for tax
purposes. Those who are not resident in the UK will not have to pay tax
on foreign income. UK residents pay tax on such foreign income. Special
rules exists for UK residents who are `domiciled' abroad. Foreign income
includes wages if a person has worked abroad, foreign investments and
savings interest, rental income on overseas property, and income from
pensions held overseas.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}ll@{}}
\toprule
\begin{minipage}[b]{0.45\columnwidth}\raggedright
Taxable State Benefits\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{0.50\columnwidth}\raggedright
Non-taxable state benefits\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.45\columnwidth}\raggedright
The State Pension\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.50\columnwidth}\raggedright
Housing Benefit\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.45\columnwidth}\raggedright
Jobseeker's Allowance\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.50\columnwidth}\raggedright
Employment and Support Allowance (income related)\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.45\columnwidth}\raggedright
Carer's Allowance\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.50\columnwidth}\raggedright
Income Support (though you may have to pay tax on Income Support if
you're involved in a strike)\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.45\columnwidth}\raggedright
Employment and Support Allowance (contribution based)\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.50\columnwidth}\raggedright
Working Tax Credit\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.45\columnwidth}\raggedright
Incapacity Benefit (from the 29th week you get it)\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.50\columnwidth}\raggedright
Child Tax Credit\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.45\columnwidth}\raggedright
Bereavement Allowance\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.50\columnwidth}\raggedright
Disability Living Allowance\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.45\columnwidth}\raggedright
Pensions paid by the Industrial Death Benefit scheme\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.50\columnwidth}\raggedright
Child Benefit (income based)\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.45\columnwidth}\raggedright
Widowed Parent's Allowance\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.50\columnwidth}\raggedright
Personal Independence Payment (PIP)\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.45\columnwidth}\raggedright
Widow's pension\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.50\columnwidth}\raggedright
Guardian's Allowance\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.45\columnwidth}\raggedright
\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.50\columnwidth}\raggedright
Attendance Allowance\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.45\columnwidth}\raggedright
\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.50\columnwidth}\raggedright
Pension Credit\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.45\columnwidth}\raggedright
\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.50\columnwidth}\raggedright
Winter Fuel Payments and Christmas Bonus\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.45\columnwidth}\raggedright
\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.50\columnwidth}\raggedright
Free TV licence for over-75s\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.45\columnwidth}\raggedright
\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.50\columnwidth}\raggedright
lump-sum bereavement payments\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.45\columnwidth}\raggedright
\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.50\columnwidth}\raggedright
Maternity Allowance\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.45\columnwidth}\raggedright
\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.50\columnwidth}\raggedright
Industrial Injuries Benefit\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.45\columnwidth}\raggedright
\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.50\columnwidth}\raggedright
Severe Disablement Allowance\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.45\columnwidth}\raggedright
\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.50\columnwidth}\raggedright
Universal Credit\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.45\columnwidth}\raggedright
\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.50\columnwidth}\raggedright
War Widow's Pension\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

\hypertarget{personal-allowance}{%
\subsection{Personal Allowance}\label{personal-allowance}}

Most people will not pay tax on all of their income. Rather, there is a
set amount of income which a person can keep tax-free. This is known as
the `Personal Allowance.' Income above the personal allowance is
taxable. As of 2017, the standard Personal Allowance is £11,500. Thus,
for most people, income up to £11,500 will be tax free, and income above
this amount is taxable. Those whose income is greater than £100,000 will
have a smaller tax-free personal allowance.\footnote{The Personal
  Allowance goes down by £1 for every £2 that the `adjusted net income'
  is above £100,000.} Those in receipt of Marriage Allowance or Blind
Person's Allowance have a greater Personal Allowance.

\hypertarget{tax-bands}{%
\subsection{Tax Bands}\label{tax-bands}}

Above the personal allowance,income is taxable. However it is not all
taxable at the same flat rate. The tax rate progressively increases in
`bands' as the amount of income increases. That is why income tax is
known as a `progressive' tax - the rate increases as income increases.
These rates are known as `marginal tax rates.' The below table shows the
tax bands for the UK (with the exception of Scotland, which has
different rates).

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}lll@{}}
\toprule
Tax Band & Taxable income & Tax rate\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
Personal Allowance & Up to £11,500 & 0\%\tabularnewline
Basic rate & £11,501 to £45,000 & 20\%\tabularnewline
Higher rate & £45,001 to £150,000 & 40\%\tabularnewline
Additional rate & over £150,000 & 45\%\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

Income above £150,000, is taxed at the Additional Rate of 45\%.

So, for example, a person who had an income of £50,000 would calculate
their tax payable as follows. As can be seen above, the personal
allowance is effectively a 0\% tax rate on the first £11,500. The basic
rate of 20\% applies on income above £11,501 and up to £45,000. Any
income between £45,001 and £150,000 is taxed at the higher rate of 40\%.

(£33499 x 0.2) + (£4999 x 0.4) = £6699.8 + £1999.6 = £8699.4.

\hypertarget{savings-and-dividend-allowances-and-tax-relief}{%
\subsection{Savings and Dividend Allowances and Tax
Relief}\label{savings-and-dividend-allowances-and-tax-relief}}

There are some other specific circumstances in which one might pay less
income tax.

Tax relief: Tax Relief allows taxpayers to reduce the tax they pay or to
get some tax repaid. Tax relief may be available to people who pay
personal pension contributions, charity donations, or maintenance
payments, and to those working in special circumstances. Tax relief also
applies to work or business expenses. Self-employed persons may be able
to claim tax relief for certain business expenses, while employees may
claim tax relief for some expenses incurred during the performance of
their job.

Generally, tax is payable on interest earned from savings accounts, and
on any dividends earned from shares owned. However, for these two
sources of income, tax relief may be applicable, depending on how the
investments are disposed or reinvested.

\hypertarget{savings-interest-allowance}{%
\subsection{Savings interest
allowance}\label{savings-interest-allowance}}

In the case of savings interest, the size of the allowance depends on
how much `other' (i.e non savings interest) income the taxpayer has. If
the total amount of `other' income is less than £16,500, then they will
be eligible for a maximum savings interest allowance of £5,000. This is
called the `starting rate.' The starting rate will be reduced by £1 for
every £1 of other income above the Personal Allowance. Those whose
`other' income is greater than or equal to £16,500 will not be eligible
for the `starting rate' of savings allowance.

HMRC offer the following example of a savings allowance calculation on
their website (we paraphrase for clarity) (HMRC,
\protect\hyperlink{ref-HMRC}{n.d.});

\begin{quote}
\emph{Mark earns £15,000 in wages and gets £200 interest on his savings.
HIs `other' income (his wages) is less than £16,500, so he is eligible
for the maximum savings interest allowance of £5000. Therefore his
starting rate is £5000}
\end{quote}

\begin{quote}
\emph{This rate is reduced by £1 for every £1 of `other' income above
the personal allowance.} \emph{His Personal Allowance is £11,500.}
\end{quote}

\begin{quote}
\emph{Therefore £15000 - £11500 = £3500. He has £3500 of `other' income
above the Personal Allowance. Therefore his starting rate is reduced by
£3,500. His remaining savings interest allowance is £1,500 (£5,000 minus
£3,500).}
\end{quote}

\begin{quote}
*Therefore, as Mark's savings interest is £200, which is under his
allowance, he doesn't pay tax on his savings interest``*
\end{quote}

The starting rate is not the only way in which one can avoid paying tax
on savings interest. Depending on which tax band a taxpayer's income
falls in (Basic, Higher or Additional), the taxpayer may get up to £1000
savings interest tax-free. The below table shows the different
allowances for the respective tax bands.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}ll@{}}
\toprule
Income Tax band & Tax-free savings income\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
Basic rate & £1000\tabularnewline
Higher rate & £500\tabularnewline
Additional rate & £0\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

The savings covered by the allowance include bank and building society
allowances, savings and credit union accounts, unit trusts, investment
trusts, investment companies, and peer to peer lending. Also, government
or company bonds, life annuity payments, and some life insurance
contracts. Savings which are already in tax-free accounts (eg ISAs) are
not included in the allowance.

\hypertarget{dividends}{%
\subsection{Dividends}\label{dividends}}

No tax is payable on the first £5,000 of dividends received in the tax
year. Above this allowance, the tax payable depends upon which income
tax band the taxpayer is in. The below table shows the dividend tax rate
for various tax bands.

This area of income tax is somewhat complex. For further information,
HMRC offers a detailed factsheet.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}ll@{}}
\toprule
Tax band & Tax rate on dividends over £5000\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
Basic rate & 7.5\%\tabularnewline
Higher rate & 32.5\%\tabularnewline
Additional rate & 38.1\%\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

\hypertarget{national-insurance-explainer}{%
\section{8.10 National insurance
explainer}\label{national-insurance-explainer}}

Originally, National Insurance (NI) did resemble an insurance program.
It began in 1911, whereby employees would pay a portion of their wages
into the scheme, and could claim from it if they fell ill or became
unemployed. In this sense, it was very much a contribution-based system,
whereby `those who paid in, could take out'. Now, workers pay National
Insurance to build up an entitlement to claim several social benefits.
One's entitlement to benefits depends on the `Class' of National
Insurance one pays.

\hypertarget{ni-classes-and-contributions}{%
\subsection{NI Classes and
Contributions:}\label{ni-classes-and-contributions}}

Some form of NI is payable by anyone who is 16 or over and is either an
employee earning over £157 per week or is self-employed and making a
profit of £6,025 per year.

There are separate `classes' of National Insurance. These are numbered 1
to 4. The class into which an individual falls depends on their type of
employment and income level.

\hypertarget{class-1-national-insurance}{%
\subsection{Class 1 National
Insurance}\label{class-1-national-insurance}}

This is paid by employees under State Pension age earning more than £157
a week. It is automatically deducted by the employer. Employers also pay
Classes 1A and 1B NI once a year on any expenses and benefits they give
to their employees. For the tax year 2017 to 2018, the rate is 13.8\%.

The 2017-18 Class 1 National Insurance Contribution rates are as
follows:

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}ll@{}}
\toprule
Your pay & Class 1 National Insurance rate\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
£157 to £866 a week (£680 to £3,750 a month) & 12\%\tabularnewline
Over £866 a week (£3,750 a month) & 2\%\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

\hypertarget{class-2-national-insurance}{%
\subsection{Class 2 National
Insurance}\label{class-2-national-insurance}}

Self-employed people who earn £6,025 per year or over pay Class 2 NI.
Those who earn less may choose to pay voluntary contributions. For the
tax year 2017-18, the rate is £2.85 a week.

\hypertarget{class-3-national-insurance}{%
\subsection{Class 3 National
Insurance}\label{class-3-national-insurance}}

These are voluntary contributions which can be paid to fill or avoid
gaps in a person's NI record.

\hypertarget{class-4-national-insurance}{%
\subsection{Class 4 National
Insurance}\label{class-4-national-insurance}}

Class 4 contributions are paid by self-employed people earning profits
over £8,164 a year. For 2017-18, the rate is 9\% on profits between
£8,164 and £45,000, and 2\% on profits over £45,000.

People who are employed and self-employed will pay Class 1 contributions
on their wages, and Class 2 or 4 contributions on their self-employment
income.

Employed people continue to pay NI until they reach State Pension age.
Self-employed people who pay Class 2 contributions will pay until they
reach State Pension age, while those who pay Class 4 contributions will
pay until April 6 of the year they reach State Pension age.

\hypertarget{national-insurance-benefits}{%
\subsection{National Insurance
Benefits:}\label{national-insurance-benefits}}

By paying (some types) of National Insurance, workers build up an
entitlement to claim state benefits, such as retirement pension. The
kind of benefits to which one is entitled depends on the Class of NI
which one has paid.

The table at the bottom shows which benefits are available to which NI
Class payers.

\hypertarget{national-insurance-credits-for-those-unable-to-pay}{%
\subsection{National Insurance Credits for those unable to
pay}\label{national-insurance-credits-for-those-unable-to-pay}}

Those who are not paying National Insurance Contributions, for example
the unemployed or ill, may receive National Insurance Credits. Those on
Jobseeker's Allowance (JSA) or Employment and Support Allowance (ESA)
will receive Class 1 credits automatically, while those who meet the
conditions for JSA or ESA, but are not receiving them, can apply for NI
Credits. There are also credits available (after satisfying conditions)
for those on other types of benefit payments. This includes maternity,
paternity or adoption pay, carers and foster carers, carers, those on
working tax credit, those on universal credit, and some other groups.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}llll@{}}
\toprule
\begin{minipage}[b]{0.33\columnwidth}\raggedright
Benefit\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{0.15\columnwidth}\raggedright
Class 1: employees\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
Class 2: self-employed\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{0.24\columnwidth}\raggedright
Class 3: voluntary contributions\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.33\columnwidth}\raggedright
Basic State Pension\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.15\columnwidth}\raggedright
Yes\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
Yes\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.24\columnwidth}\raggedright
Yes\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.33\columnwidth}\raggedright
Additional State Pension\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.15\columnwidth}\raggedright
Yes\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
No\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.24\columnwidth}\raggedright
No\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.33\columnwidth}\raggedright
New State Pension\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.15\columnwidth}\raggedright
Yes\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
Yes\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.24\columnwidth}\raggedright
Yes\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.33\columnwidth}\raggedright
Contribution-based Jobseeker's Allowance\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.15\columnwidth}\raggedright
Yes\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
No\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.24\columnwidth}\raggedright
No\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.33\columnwidth}\raggedright
Contribution-based Employment and Support Allowance\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.15\columnwidth}\raggedright
Yes\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
Yes\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.24\columnwidth}\raggedright
No\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.33\columnwidth}\raggedright
Maternity Allowance\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.15\columnwidth}\raggedright
Yes\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
Yes\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.24\columnwidth}\raggedright
No\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.33\columnwidth}\raggedright
Bereavement Payment\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.15\columnwidth}\raggedright
Yes\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
Yes\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.24\columnwidth}\raggedright
Yes\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.33\columnwidth}\raggedright
Bereavement Allowance\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.15\columnwidth}\raggedright
Yes\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
Yes\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.24\columnwidth}\raggedright
Yes\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.33\columnwidth}\raggedright
Widowed Parent's Allowance\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.15\columnwidth}\raggedright
Yes\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
Yes\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.24\columnwidth}\raggedright
Yes\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.33\columnwidth}\raggedright
Bereavement Support Payment\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.15\columnwidth}\raggedright
Yes\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
Yes\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.24\columnwidth}\raggedright
No\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

\hypertarget{core-arguments-for-progressivity}{%
\section{8.11 Core arguments for
progressivity}\label{core-arguments-for-progressivity}}

We've seen that growing inequality in a society can lead to negative
consequences for social cohesion and dire outcomes for the poor. We base
our argument for progressive tax systems on the following key ideas.

\begin{itemize}
\item
  Macroeconomic - The rich save proportionately more (spend less) of
  their income than do the middle class or poor. Therefore, aggregate
  demand is stronger with redistribution.
\item
  Utilitarian / Darwinian - More money for the rich is worth less in
  utility terms (or subject to conspicuous-consumption arms races).
\item
  Political problems with growing inequality -\textgreater{} Oligarchy.
  Monopoly/Oligarchy can also lead to increased rents and inefficient
  production of goods.
\end{itemize}

We do have to balance these arguments against the idea of incentives.
How does a government decide what should be taxed? Should this be income
or consumption? Should it be companies or individual wealth that are
targeted, or rather, in what proportions? And are the Government's
nudges towards `better' choices reducing the freedom of individuals to
choose? Is paternalistic government a good thing or a bad thing?

If it is the case that consumption taxes, like VAT, are regressive, then
this highlights the need to evaluate the broader systemic progressivity
of the entire tax system, and its net effects on different income
groups. We prioritise this in our proposals section, whereby the
inequality of the system is one of our key evaluatory metrics.

\hypertarget{wealth-begets-wealth-explaining-piketty}{%
\section{8.12 Wealth Begets Wealth: Explaining
Piketty}\label{wealth-begets-wealth-explaining-piketty}}

The economist Thomas Piketty (Piketty
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Piketty2014a}{2014}) found that in a capitalist
economic system, returns on capital wealth will increase at a higher
rate (faster) than wages.

Poorer people make most of their income through wages and hold little
wealth in investments. Richer people make a greater proportion of their
wealth from investments and much less in wages. The below cartoon
illustrates the state of affairs in the US.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}c@{}}
\toprule
\includegraphics{ChapterPictures/6-17-richgetricher.png}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\emph{Figure 8.18 - The rich get richer through secondary wealth
creation}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

So, as revenue-generating property owners' wealth increases faster than
poorer people's wages grow, the gap between rich and poor will tend to
increase. There is unfairness built into the system; it works in favour
of those who have already accumulated wealth, making them wealthier in a
self-reinforcing spiral that requires less and less effort on the part
of the wealthier the richer they get.

But why? Wouldn't we expect that financial capital available to invest
would be diverted into high-yield `low hanging fruit' investments first,
and that over time, competition over these promising investments pushed
the returns down?

For sure, improving technology would offer new investment opportunities,
but in principle, even that should lead to more competition and
eventually reduced yields for investors. Why then did Piketty find that
the return on financial investment outstripped the growth in wages over
the long term?\footnote{And then, if wealth is consequently better
  distributed, the option of more leisure time and less toil, as Keynes
  once hoped for}

To answer this question we have to distinguish between the two meanings
of the word `investment.' The first and primary meaning of `investment'
is the creation, or construction, of a new physical asset; for example,
imagine a manufacturing company investing in new equipment. This is
investment in the \emph{economic} sense.

The second meaning of the word is in the \emph{financial sense}. I
invest if I buy a financial asset which I hope will give me a financial
return. This is `investment' in the financial sense.\footnote{We can
  also talk of `placing our money' somewhere, and French has a separate
  word for a purely financial, not real, investment - a
  `\emph{placement}'} There are some financial investments that are also
economic investments. Classical economists talk about factories as
`capital' goods.\footnote{The related distinction between capital and
  land (in classical economic terms) is considered in more detail at the
  end of the chapter on land} Such investments are \emph{expandable}. As
new funds become available, more factories are built. An investor who
builds a new factory competes with another factory down the road. The
competition reduces prices and the rate of profit falls overall. Even
purchasing pre-existing assets can sometimes be part of this process, if
the underlying asset is expandable, and that purchase leads to some
physical investment elsewhere in the system.

But there are some financial investments that are not economic
investments. We describe these as `pseudo-investments.' The critical
thing about these pseudo-investments is that they are not expandable:
they are fixed. \emph{Their return is not competed away} when funds are
plentiful. Rather, the price of these assets goes up. A typical example
is land. The amount of land in central London is fixed. It cannot
expand. Another example would be shares in monopolies, or even other
companies existing outside the perfect competition beloved of
economists.

So what does this mean for the inequality of wealth? Well, if wealth is
primarily composed of `expandable' forms like factories, then greater
availability of investible funds will lead to better growth. That growth
will compete away the returns of investors as the profit rate falls. If
however wealth is composed primarily of non-expandable forms like land
and companies in monopoly positions, then as individuals save and demand
assets, these assets will just go up in price, making the richer even
richer.

These methods of the rich getting richer are not only unfair, as the
monopolist or landowner need not work for the increases in wealth. They
are also economically inefficient, as the monopolist overcharges and
also pulls scarce investment funds away from productive investments.

The MIT PhD student Matthew Rognlie noted that Piketty's conclusion
depends on housing being included in what Piketty calls `capital'
(wealth) (Matthews \protect\hyperlink{ref-Matthews}{2015}). Without
housing, the return on wealth ownership no longer outstrips the growth
in the economy. The share of GDP going to capital when housing is
excluded is even falling slightly.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}c@{}}
\toprule
\includegraphics{ChapterPictures/6-18-CapitalIncomeDisplacingLabourIncome.png}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\emph{Figure 8.19 - Capital income displacing labour
income}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

This is consistent with our argument, since housing is closer in nature
to land (i.e.~non-expandable with a local monopoly) than capital in the
classical economic sense (i.e.~expandable and competitive). To properly
test our hypothesis (that it is the monopoly element - land in housing,
market power in companies - that causes inequality) we'd need to
disaggregate the land element from housing (relatively straightforward)
and the monopoly element from companies (much less straightforward).
However, the data is at least broadly supportive of the case suggested
by Piketty's economic hypothesis.

To summarise, economic theory tells us that there are some particular
ways in which the wealthy are able to accumulate wealth which we propose
to be unfair and unproductive to the economy: Land, Monopoly, and the
interplay between interest rates and asset values.

\#\#~Land

Wealthy people make a large proportion of their wealth through increases
in the value of land which they own. When we talk about land, we are
primarily concerned with the land on which urban buildings stand. This
is the part of its value associated with \emph{location}. Land is fixed
in supply, and when certain locations become more desirable (such as
London), supply cannot increase to meet demand.

The result is a localised price increase and an increase in wealth of
people who own land in the area. It is important to remember that this
value was not created by the landowner, but rather by the people who
made the location more desirable. These external value drivers include
the government, by creating transport links, schools, and parks;
business owners, by creating jobs, cafes, shops, and services; and the
community, by building community-links and cultural ambience. All of
these creations increase the desirability of the land in a particular
location. This in turn increases its value. Under the UK's current
system, the landowner is able to keep this value increase.

We believe this is unfair, since the community as a whole produces the
wealth, and we propose a Land Value Tax to address this unfairness. We
go into detail about this topic in chapter eight.

\hypertarget{monopoly}{%
\subsection{Monopoly}\label{monopoly}}

\begin{quote}
*``The head of one of the largest manufacturing firms in the United
States said to me recently,''It is not on our ordinary business that we
make our money; it is where we can get a monopoly." And this, I think,
is generally true.``* (George \protect\hyperlink{ref-George}{1883})
\end{quote}

A `monopoly' is a stranglehold on a particular desired product, asset or
service. As in the case of landowners, who are themselves a sort of
monopolist, monopolists get rich because of a lack of competitors in the
market, which allows them to set nearly any price they like. This means
that their profits are far above the efficent level that would be set in
a freely competitive market. Natural monopolies can exist when the
economies of scale in running a particular business mean that it is more
efficient to be large, and market share is captured on a
winner-takes-all basis. The figure below summarises concepts of
competition and monopoly.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}c@{}}
\toprule
\includegraphics{OtherPictures/Monopoly.png}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\emph{Figure 8.20 Competition and Monopoly}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

\hypertarget{as-interest-rates-fall-the-value-of-assets-appreciates}{%
\subsection{As Interest Rates Fall, the Value of Assets
appreciates}\label{as-interest-rates-fall-the-value-of-assets-appreciates}}

Another effect is closely related, and acts to accentuate monopoly
effects. As real investments get exhausted, rates of return on real
investments may fall. In addition, the central bank can cut its interest
rates to stimulate the economy. This encourages people to take on loans,
and through high indebtedness, we can get accustomed to a low interest
rate situation. This relationship has important price effects on land
and other monopolies.

Wealthy people can see increases in their wealth when interest rates go
down. The interest rate determines the ratio of the return on an asset
to the capitalised value. For example, as interest rates fall, people
can afford to borrow more to buy a house. There will therefore be an
increase in the ratio of the purchase price of the house to the rent
that such a house will command. This is also true of other forms of
wealth, like company shares. Of course if the interest rate goes up,
then the opposite happens. Since the early 1980s, there has been a fall
in interest rates to the current historically low levels. Asset values
have accordingly ticked up.

The figure below summarises how these factors can contribute to
increased income inequality.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}c@{}}
\toprule
\includegraphics{OtherPictures/FactorsOfIncomeInequality.png}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\emph{Figure 8.21 Factors of Income Inequality}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

\hypertarget{options-for-taxes-on-personal-income-unedited}{%
\section{8.14 Options for Taxes on Personal Income \^{}\^{}
(UNEDITED)}\label{options-for-taxes-on-personal-income-unedited}}

Income Tax and National Insurance together account for around half of
all revenue raised. These taxes are likely to be important for the
foreseeable future. Income tax is important as a tax on wage income and
on income from investments. It is also the primary means of affecting
the distribution of income using the tax system. However the existing
approach is, like the rest of the tax system, unnecessary complex.
Income tax, and its close cousin National Insurance (which we combine
into a single tax) are also extremely efficient ways of raising revenue.

At present, the wage income is largely deducted at source in the `Pay as
You Earn' (PAYE) system. This means that companies administer the
payment of income tax. They know how much tax to deduct because every
individual has a tax code. The tax code indicates whether the taxpayer
pays basic or higher rate tax.

Some income does not fall under PAYE for example: dividend income. It is
impractical for a company to know all the tax codes of its shareholders.
Thus, income from dividends needs to be declared by individuals at the
end of the tax year alongside income tax paid by the individual
concerned. At present, corporation tax is paid on profits, and the
income tax paid on dividend income is reduced by an equivalent amount to
compensate.

\hypertarget{simplification-options}{%
\subsection{Simplification Options}\label{simplification-options}}

We can distinguish between tax simplification and the addition of a
basic income.

First, lets look at tax simplification. We can simplify the tax code
through the following procedure. First put the income tax and NI system
together for earned income, and apply the same rates to unearned income
as earned income. Then, you would consider the top rates of tax (Income
Tax + NI). We keep these as they are now, and then apply it to lower tax
bands. At the same time increase the personal allowance. The two
procedures can ensure that nobody pays more tax on their earned income
than they do at present.

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  Option 1 is this zero-high rate system (ie a large personal allowance
  plus a top rate)
\item
  Option 2 is the same system, but with a low rate (no personal
  allowance) plus a high rate. A small basic income can be added.
\item
  Option 3 is a basic income plus the high rate flat tax
\end{itemize}

With a flat system, everyone faces the same tax rate. There is no need
for a separate tax code for each individual. All income can thus be
taxed at source. This would also brings the taxation of dividends into
the income tax system, which would therefore mean there is no need for a
corporation tax on the part of company profits hich is paid out as
dividends. We still, however, need a tax on retained earnings.

The disadvantage of a flat tax system is that it is less progressive
than the other system.

\hypertarget{conclusions-2}{%
\subsection{Conclusions}\label{conclusions-2}}

We propose to combine the current National Insurance and Income Tax
systems so that there is a single tax on income. We also propose to
simplify the rate structure so that there is only one rate above the
allowance. Having a single rate allows the tax system to be made
considerably simpler, and permits taxes to be deducted at source.

\hypertarget{overview-of-possibilities-for-taxing-wealth-unedited}{%
\section{8.15 Overview of Possibilities for Taxing Wealth \^{}\^{}
(UNEDITED)}\label{overview-of-possibilities-for-taxing-wealth-unedited}}

\hypertarget{source-based-private-wealth-taxes}{%
\subsection{Source-based Private Wealth
Taxes}\label{source-based-private-wealth-taxes}}

In general, we prefer to recommend source-based wealth taxes rather than
residence based taxes. In other words, we propose to tax
income-generating assets located in the UK. The advantage of this
approach is that these assets are typically less mobile than the
individual. This reduces the risk of tax avoidance. However, there may
be a case for an internationally coordinated residence tax as well.

\hypertarget{residence-based-private-wealth-taxes}{%
\subsection{Residence-based Private Wealth
Taxes}\label{residence-based-private-wealth-taxes}}

Because of the source-based wealth taxes we have suggested above, such a
tax would not need to be set as stringently. However, risk of avoidance
by the rich may be high because of their access to skilled legal advice
and mechanisms to move their assets to the most advantageous locations.
It may therefore be necessary to impose an international residence-based
wealth tax.

We propose to consult with European and other partners so as to put in
place an internationally coordinated wealth tax. The objective would be
to ensure that the richest in society do not get richer faster. As
outlined in previous chapters, the increased rate of growth in wealth as
compared to the growth in average incomes contributes to the compounding
of inequality. For a variety of reasons, this is not a desirable
outcome. To that end, we aim to form a coalition with other countries to
promote transparency, and create a single coordinated residence wealth
tax. However, getting international agreement consensus on such a policy
would be difficult and time consuming, and so should not be relied upon.

\hypertarget{conclusions-3}{%
\subsection{Conclusions}\label{conclusions-3}}

We will apply a source based approach which minimises the possibilities
for avoidance, including a land value tax. We will cover this in the
next chapters on Corporations, Land and Finance.

\hypertarget{summary-3}{%
\section{8.16 Summary}\label{summary-3}}

We've seen that wealth and income inequality can have deleterious social
effects. We've noted the importance of income tax as a progressive tax
reducing income inequality. We've also noted three methods of wealth
acquisition that are both \emph{economically inefficient} and
\emph{unjust:} Land ownership, monopolies, and related unearned capital
gains due to falling interest rates. In the next two chapters, we will
look at corporate structures; after that we will consider land; and
finally, environment and resource rents.

\newpage

\hypertarget{part-9-corporations}{%
\section{PART 9: CORPORATIONS}\label{part-9-corporations}}

\hypertarget{corporations-and-tax}{%
\section{9.1 Corporations and Tax}\label{corporations-and-tax}}

r tufte::newthought(`If we take as a given') that the benefits of paying
income tax outweigh the costs to individual taxpayers, the question
becomes one of what other players in society should be liable.
Individuals with sufficient earnings pay National Insurance and income
tax. People who buy goods and services pay VAT. It serves to reason then
that companies which consume goods and services, and earn profits in the
UK, should also be liable for a tax. For what exactly is a company but a
collective group of people organised into delivering a certain good or
service. It is fo

Despite seemingly an uncontroversial position, the minefield that
surrounds corporation tax begs to differ. Several different taxes are
currently levelled on companies that operate in the UK, including
corporation tax on their profits from their business operations, and
business rates on the rateable value of their land and buildings.
Several loopholes and rebates exist which aim to keep companies pacified
against having to pay increased levels of tax. However, these loopholes
often overstep the mark and leave corporations which, while in reality
conduct the majority of their business and operations within the UK, are
able to claim a foreign base and avoid taxes all together.

In an increasingly globalised world, countries now have to tread the
thin line between levying sufficient levels of corporation tax, and
maintaining an attractive enough environment for the companies to remain
in the country, rather than relocating their base to a less `expensive'
region in the world. It's a difficult task, and the complexity of
determining effective tax rates domestically while coordinating with a
myriad of different international standards and regulations means that
these loopholes are difficult to close.

However, lest we forget, corporation taxes are an important source of
revenue for a Government which provides the employees of these
companies, and the companies themselves, with a variety of public goods
that enable them to function successfully. Everything from high-quality
national education to effective public transport assists corporations in
operating a successful business. It's important, then, that these
entities pay their fair share.

\#\#Knowledge is Power

Knowledge, we emphasise, is power. In this chapter we aim to empower the
reader with information about what exactly the corporation tax landscape
looks like in the UK and how it operates, and explain why the current
framework permits certain issues to persist.

It's worth then outlining some definitions before we enter into the
murky world of corporation tax law administration.

\#\#\#Corporations

Corporations are, in their most basic definition, a~large company or
group of companies authorized to act as a single entity and recognized
as such in law. A company is a collection of individuals who have
grouped together to provide a professional service or goods. These
companies and corporations, however, are legal constructs. They have no
\emph{real} presence in the world, but are legal forms ultimately owned
and controlled by a person or people. A limited company is a legal form
where the financial liability of the owners is limited to the net assets
of the company. In other words, a company can go bankrupt and the owners
of the company have some protection from the company's creditors.
Corporations are the legal forms which are dominant in modern society
and, much like religious organisations and educational institutions,
wield enormous power.

\#\#\#Corporation Tax

Corporation tax is a tax on company profits. In simple terms, profit is
the difference between sales revenue and company costs. In this, there
is an analogy with a general principle of taxation, which says that
those who have more should pay more. With respect to corporations, those
companies who make more profit, should pay more Corporation tax. In the
UK, this is currently set at 21\% for companies with annual profits over
£300,000 (HMRC
\protect\hyperlink{ref-HMRC2019a}{2019}\protect\hyperlink{ref-HMRC2019a}{b})

In the UK, Corporation Tax is a tax payable on the profits of doing
business as a limited company, a foreign company with a UK branch or
office or club, co-operative or other unincorporated
association.\footnote{An unincorporated association is an organisation
  set up through an agreement between a group of people who come
  together for a reason other than to make a profit (for example, a
  voluntary group or a sports club).}

Such organisations will pay corporation tax on the money they make from:

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  doing business (referred to as `trading profits')
\item
  investments;
\item
  selling assets for more than they cost (referred to as chargeable
  gains).
\end{itemize}

If the company is based in the UK, it must pay corporation tax on all
its profits from both the UK and abroad. If a company isn't based in the
UK but has an office or branch here, it only pays Corporation Tax on
profits from its UK activities.

\#\#\#Business Rates

Corporation tax is not the only tax on companies. Companies also pay
business rates, which is a tax on the rateable value of land and
buildings. This is covered in the part on section on land and property.

\#\#\#Rates and Reliefs

Companies pay corporation tax at the rate which applied during their
accounting period. The current Corporation Tax rate on company profits
is 21\%.

More complex calculations are also required for: associated
companies\footnote{One company is associated with another if either one
  company controls the other or both companies are controlled by the
  same companies or people}; companies who have more than one applicable
rate during their accounting period; and companies who have an
accounting period of less than 12 months. There are also different
corporate taxation rates for `ring fence profits' of companies involved
in oil extraction in the UK or UK continental shelf.

When preparing the company's accounts, the costs of running the company
may be deducted from the profits. Anything which a company director or
employee gets personal use from must be treated as a `benefit'. It may
be necessary to pay tax on these items. It may be possible to claim
capital allowances on assets kept for use in the business, for example,
machinery, equipment and business vehicles. Some other reliefs are also
available for specific cases, such as where the business is involved in
the creative industries or involved in research and development.

Organisations must calculate and report their own tax obligations. There
is no bill from HMRC. Rather, they must register for corporation tax
within three months of doing business. There may also be a penalty for
late registration.

\hypertarget{ring-fenced-companies}{%
\subsubsection{Ring Fenced Companies}\label{ring-fenced-companies}}

Different corporation tax rates apply to companies that make profits
from oil extraction or oil rights from UK-based resources. These
companies are designated as `ring-fenced' due to reasons of national
energy policy and security. Such companies can claim Marginal relief on
profits between £300,000 and £1.5 million.

\#\#\#Registration

Registration can be done online, and companies require their Unique
Taxpayer Reference number, which usually will have been posted to them
by HMRC after the company was registered with Companies House.

While registering, companies also need to inform HMRC of:

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  the company registration number
\item
  the date they started to do business (the accounting period will start
  from this date)
\item
  the date the annual accounts are made up to.
\end{itemize}

Unincorporated associations will need to call HMRC to register.

\#\#\#Accounting Records

In order to calculate how much to pay, companies must keep accounting
records. HMRC has strict and detailed requirements for accounting
records. If accounting records are not kept, companies can be fined
£3,000 by HMRC or individuals may be disqualified from being company
directors. It is necessary to keep records for six years from the end of
the last company financial year they relate to.

\#\#\#Tax Returns

When companies or associations receive a `Notice to Deliver a Company
Tax Return' from HMRC, they must file a Company Tax return. They must
still file a return, even if they have made a loss or have no
Corporation Tax to pay. The tax payable should usually be paid 9 months
and 1 day after the accounting period\footnote{The accounting period is
  normally the same 12 months as the financial year covered by a
  company's annual accounts} it covers.

The tax return is due 12 months after the accounting period it covers.
There are various penalties for late filing. If the return is six months
late, then HMRC will send a `tax determination' to say how much tax the
organisation must pay. Organisations cannot appeal against a tax
determination.

\hypertarget{competing-narratives}{%
\section{9.2 Competing Narratives}\label{competing-narratives}}

\hypertarget{the-need-for-corporation-taxes}{%
\subsection{The Need for Corporation
Taxes}\label{the-need-for-corporation-taxes}}

When it comes to corporation tax, there are two competing narratives at
play. The right-leaning microeconomic story posits corporations as
wealth creators and suggests that they should be taxed lightly.
According to this narrative, corporation tax creates `distortions'.
Reducing corporation tax encourages business to invest and to make
profits, and, in so doing, employ more people and provide more useful
goods and services.

The more left-leaning story, however, is focussed on the macroeconomic
picture. If an economy is `wage-led' (as most economies are), then
boosting the wage share will lead to increased aggregate demand. The
profits and capital gains of companies in the end simply make the rich
richer, and the rich spend a smaller proportion of the income than the
poor. So a higher corporation tax could promote economic growth.

So what is the truth? Why should corporations pay tax on their
operations? It seems obvious that as both wealth creators in an economy,
and consumers of public services, there is a clear need to balance the
needs for revenue, and to account for the value corporations derive from
public goods and service provisions, alongside the need to maintain an
attractive enough environment to encourage them to settle nationally and
employ a national workforce. There are two sides to any coin, and we'll
explore these concepts below

\hypertarget{one-side-of-the-coin}{%
\subsection{One Side of the Coin}\label{one-side-of-the-coin}}

\hypertarget{why-tax-1}{%
\subsubsection{Why Tax}\label{why-tax-1}}

A corporation tax is a tax on company profits. It generally covers both
profits retained within the company (retained earnings) and those paid
out as dividends (distributed earnings). A credit is applied to
distributed earnings so tax is only paid once. But should we have a
corporate tax at all? Since companies are owned by individuals, might it
not be simpler to tax individuals rather than companies?

It might be clearest first to define the functions of a corporation tax
first. At the simplest level, such a policy functions as an at-source
tax on company profits made in the UK. This has a number of purposes,
including regulating foreign ownership of wealth and assets in the
United Kingdom; preventing companies from being used as vehicles for
low-tax saving; and to ensure that companies pay a fair share of the
cost for the government services provided to the company (eg.
enforcement of property rights, education of the workforce, health care
provision).

There are also several pragmatic reasons for the application of
corporation tax, which will be explored below.

\hypertarget{revenue}{%
\subsubsection{Revenue}\label{revenue}}

Corporation tax makes up approximately 8\% of HMRC total receipts. It is
the fourth biggest tax in terms of receipts: after Income tax, VAT and
National Insurance Contributions, although the financial crisis saw
income from the tax fall significantly, from £46.3 billion in 2007/08 to
£39.3bn in 2013/14 (UK Parliament
\protect\hyperlink{ref-UKParliament2015}{2015}). A small number of firms
pay the vast majority of income tax. According to the Oxford Centre for
Business Taxation, 1\% of all companies account for 81\% of receipts. As
it is a tax on profits, income from the tax is strongly correlated with
the business cycle and thus can be very volatile. The below chart shows
the relationship between the state of the economy and receipts from
corporation tax (UK Parliament
\protect\hyperlink{ref-UKParliament2015}{2015}). The vertical axis is
the annual change in corporation tax receipts and the horizontal axis is
the annual change in economic output (1979/80-2013/14).

At the time of writing, receipts from Corporation Tax are surprisingly
high, with the UK government raising £56 billion in the 2016-17
financial year, which is an increase of 21\% from the previous year
(Miller \protect\hyperlink{ref-Miller2017}{2017}). This is forecasted to
decrease to £53.2bn in 2017-18. However, onshore receipts are projected
to fall to 2010 levels, as the below chart from the Institute of Fiscal
Studies shows.

The current level of receipts from Corporation Tax have been attributed
to several factors, including a general growth in the UK economy,
increases in the profitability of UK corporations, a fall in investment
spending (because companies can offset some investment against profits)
and increased focus on tax avoidance (Jackson and Houlder,
\protect\hyperlink{ref-JacksonHoulder}{n.d.}).

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}c@{}}
\toprule
\includegraphics{ChapterPictures/7-2-ReceiptsFromCorpTax.png}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\emph{Figure 7.2 - Corporation Tax Avoidance}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

\hypertarget{private-companies-rely-on-public-services-too}{%
\subsubsection{Private Companies Rely on Public Services
Too}\label{private-companies-rely-on-public-services-too}}

Corporate profits are not totally independent of public investment.
Corporations require a number of public goods to run their companies
successfully - from educated and healthy employees, smooth roads and
public transport systems, and power grids and telecommunications systems
for their companies to operate. They therefore rely on tax-financed
public goods, including social investment in the education and health of
employees, public infrastructure, legal contracts and property rights.
Without these structures, which are upheld and funded by government,
corporations would not be able to conduct business profitably.

\hypertarget{tackling-rent}{%
\subsubsection{Tackling Rent}\label{tackling-rent}}

Another reason for corporation tax concerns economic rents. Economic
rents are basically the analogue to land rents: whereas it is assumed
that high profits would be competed away by other companies, in some
cases this is not possible because the company has some advantage that
cannot be replicated by others.

The OECD describes these as `profits above the normal level of return
required for a business to be successful. Economic rents mainly arise as
the result of monopoly profits or market power and entrepreneurial skill
or ideas.' There are many kinds of economic rent. For example, this
includes control over intellectual property, which prevents competitors
from entering a market (and thereby lowering prices through competition)
can lead to such profits.

Nicholas Shaxton offers further examples,

\begin{quote}
\emph{`{[}rents{]} like oil money that flows effortlessly into Saudi or
Kuwaiti coffers - are earnings that arise not from hard work and real
innovation but from accidents of nature or good fortune. Adair Turner
recently explained how banks in the City of London are particularly
adept at earning rents, such as from exploiting insider knowledge and
expertise; from natural oligopolies in market-making and other
activities; and from ``valueless'' trading activity'(Shaxson
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Shaxson2011}{2011}).}
\end{quote}

It would be ideal to design corporation tax so as to tax economic rents
only, which should result in no market efficiency losses.Therefore,
companies who hold a monopoly over certain goods and services collect
economic rent due to market imperfections such as lack of competitive
pressures. In such cases, the consumers or the public pays an economic
rent over and above an acceptable price. Corporation tax is able to
recoup such rents and redistribute those funds to the public.

\#\#\#The Backstop

Individuals can have income from employment and from owning assets. The
tax on this income is levied through the UK's `income tax' and `National
Insurance' systems. We call the tax on profits of companies `corporation
tax'\footnote{Sometimes different terminology is used: the income tax is
  called the `personal income tax' and the corporation tax `corporate
  income tax', but we avoid this terminology here}

Income tax is not only a tax on employment income, it is also a tax on
distributed profits (dividends). Profits distributed as dividends are
taxed twice; once under the corporation tax and once under the income
tax system. The rate of income tax paid is lower to account for the
corporation tax already deducted.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}c@{}}
\toprule
\includegraphics{ChapterPictures/7-1-IncTaxandCorpTax.png}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\emph{Figure 7.1 - Corporation Tax and Income Tax}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

Since the country of the activities of the company and the country of
residence of the owner could be different. This means that profits could
be made in one country and then distributed to an owner resident in
another country

Thus corporation tax acts as a sort of backstop to the income tax
system. Corporation tax is paid on profits. Profits can, in turn, be
retained within the company (retained earnings), or paid out as
dividends to the owners of the company. Dividends would be subject to
income tax, but since they have already paid corporation tax, a
deduction is made for that purpose. The tax paid on dividends will
depend on the residence of the person receiving the dividends. Foreign
owners of UK companies are not caught by UK income tax, but corporation
tax requires them to pay some percentage of the profit they received.

As discussed earlier, it might be difficult to tax residents' wealth for
two main reasons. First, that rich people are geographically movile and
can move to the lowest tax jurisdictions; second, residents can hide
offshore wealth in foreign and secret locations. It is therefore
difficult to tax individuals on their global wealth. It is not
impossible though, as the US does attempt to tax US passport holders on
their global income.

Corporation tax prevents at least some of the avoidance associated with
companies as a legal form. Without a corporation tax, wealthy
individuals could \emph{shelter} their income in a company. Companies
are a legal form, and a company does not necessarily represent a
business nor is a business necessarily incorporated. For example, an
individual can be paid through a fully-owned company, and then offset
some costs and smooth wage and dividend payments so as to minimize
higher rate income tax on their earnings. In this sense then,
corporation taxes is an essential companion to the personal income tax
system.

\hypertarget{the-other-side}{%
\subsection{The Other Side}\label{the-other-side}}

\#\#\#Economic `Distortions'

When taxes cause corporations or individuals to behave differently than
they otherwise would, for example by moving their headquarters to
another country, the taxes are said to cause \emph{distortions}. Taxes
on corporate profits are thought to be particularly distorting, in that
they create and negate a variety of incentives which result in
significant behaviour change by corporations, and those who invest in
them. Researchers Johannson et al, in their 2008 OECD Working Paper,
observed that corporation tax is likely to have many kinds of effects;

\begin{quote}
\emph{`The corporate income tax is likely to distort the total amount of
investment and the type of investment projects that are undertaken, the
corporate sources of finance (debt, newly issued equity or retained
earnings), the location of the corporate tax base, the choice of a
business legal form and the tax might have an impact on corporate
mergers and acquisitions.'} (Johansson et al.
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Johansson2008}{2008})
\end{quote}

The researchers suggested that, when different taxes are ranked from
least distortive to most distortive, recurrent taxes on immovable
property are the least distortive tax instrument, followed by
consumption taxes (and other property taxes), personal income taxes and
finally corporate income taxes being the most distortive.\footnote{This
  is in terms of reducing long-run GDP per capita}

In particular, these distortions are likely to negatively affect
economic growth. There is evidence that corporate income taxes
negatively affect economic growth. Research by Lee and Gordon examined
data from 70 countries which covered the period 1970 -1997. They found
that, after correcting for other variables, that the corporation tax
rate was `significantly negatively correlated' with economic growth.
They suggest that that cutting the corporate tax rate by 10 percentage
points can increase the annual growth rate by around 1.1\%. The authors
explained these findings by suggesting that lower corporate tax rates
may encourage more entrepreneurial activity, with more people choosing
to leave employment and start businesses.\footnote{The authors noted
  that lower corporation tax rates seem to be correlated with lower
  personal tax (income tax) revenue, which would be consistent with such
  a theory.} The authors stressed that

\begin{quote}
\emph{``the growth effects of tax reforms, as well as the more standard
efficiency and equity effects in a static context, merit serious
consideration.''} (Lee and Gordon
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Lee2005}{2005}).
\end{quote}

The is a particular kind of distortion which is particular to
corporation tax. This is the `debt-equity' distortion. This results from
an asymmetry at the heart of corporation tax, whereby the return on
equity is taxed, but interest payments on corporate debt are tax
deductible. This can increase the risk of bankruptcy and encourage
tax-minimisation strategies through taking on more debt. Writers of an
IMF blog argues for 2 ways to mitigate debt bias - to limit the tax
deductibility of interest or provide a deduction for equity costs
(Mooij, Tieman, and Keen \protect\hyperlink{ref-DeMooij2016}{2016}).

\#\#\#Who really pays the piper?

In some ways, corporation tax can be thought as an indirect tax on those
who are owners of capital. These owners may be individuals or
shareholders of corporations, who gain or lose value through changes in
the value of their shares or through the receipt of dividends after a
company gains profits through their operations. Notably, the corporation
tax burden falls mostly on capital owners, rather than employees because
stock ownership is most concentrated amongst the wealthiest individuals
and family trusts (Shaxson \protect\hyperlink{ref-Shaxson2011}{2011}).

Because corporations are not natural, but are legal constructions, it
has been argued that Corporation Tax is not paid by corporations but by
people, and that sometimes these people are not the ones we might prefer
to target.

Economist Helen Miller made the following argument in 2017, when she
said that ``an important feature of Corporation tax is that the ultimate
burden is not necessarily entirely borne by company shareholders. It can
be borne by workers. In short, if firms decide to respond to higher
corporation tax rates by doing less investment in the UK, that leaves UK
employees with fewer job opportunities and lower average wages. Evidence
suggests that, because capital tends to be much more mobile than
workers, a significant share of the burden of corporation tax tends to
get shifted to labour. Corporation tax can also be borne by consumers if
firms respond by increasing the prices they charge.'' *(Miller
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Miller2017}{2017})

However, others have argued that it is unclear whether corporation tax
falls largely on employees, and have made the wry point that if
Corporation tax doesn't fall on the owners of capital, then why do so
many companies try to avoid the tax?

\hypertarget{loopholes-in-the-law}{%
\section{9.3 Loopholes in the Law}\label{loopholes-in-the-law}}

\#\#Tax Avoidance

Because Corporation tax is based on profits, it is vulnerable to clever
accountants who are able to exploit differing tax rules in different
companies. We outline a case study below about Apple's corporate tax
avoidance.

\#\#\#\textbf{Case Study: Apple}

In 2016, the technology company Apple, accustomed to great praise,
received a taste of bad press, but not for its new iPhone model. Rather,
its tax arrangements attracted scrutiny from the European Commission,
which demanded that Apple pay up to £13 billion (\& interest) for unpaid
taxes in Ireland. Both Ireland and Apple condemned the decision,
claiming a right to create an agreement between a sovereign nation and a
private company. Thus arose a farcical situation in which the Irish
government brought legal proceedings in order that they not receive £13
billion in back taxes.

In fact, the agreement between Ireland and Apple allowed the tech
company to pay a maximum effective tax rate of only 1\% of their
profits, a classic sweetheart deal. The standard corporation tax rate in
Ireland is already quite low compared to other EU countries, at 12.5\%.
The arrangement between Ireland and Apple was complex. Apple created two
subsidiary entities in Ireland, which effectively own most of the
company's intellectual property. These organisations then licensed the
intellectual property to Apple subsidiaries elsewhere in the world.
Thus, profit earned in countries around the world is transferred to the
Irish companies, ostensibly in the form of license fees. This income
would normally be taxed at 12.5\% in Ireland but the agreement between
Apple and Ireland allowed the profits to be attributed to a `head
office', not located in any country (and thus not subject to tax in any
jurisdiction). The result was that Apple paid only 1\% tax on its
European profits in 2003 and 0.005\% in 2014.

According to the European Commission, this arrangement amounted to a
form of state aid and was illegal for EU members. The European
Competition Commissioner, Margrethe Vestager argued that the deal was
unfair to other businesses, stating,

\begin{quote}
\emph{Our rules don't stop governments applying a law rate to every
company\ldots{}what they can't do is to select just a few favoured
businesses and give them special treatment which their rivals can't get.
So, when we ask national governments to reclaim unpaid taxes, all we're
doing is ensuring that everyone has an equal opportunity.'} (Vestager
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Vestager2016}{2016})
\end{quote}

\hypertarget{the-race-to-the-bottom}{%
\subsection{The Race to the Bottom}\label{the-race-to-the-bottom}}

The above discussion illustrates the underlying tensions between
governments and corporations, and the growing difficulty facing
governments who attempt to tax corporate profits in a globalised world.
Multinational companies wish to minimise their tax bill and are willing
to move around and create complex tax structures to achieve this goal.
Countries seek to attract investment and gain income from corporation
tax. In the case of Ireland, the government has positioned itself as a
low tax country in order to attract investment and create jobs. This
dynamic between corporations and governments creates a \emph{race to the
bottom} in which governments compete to attract companies by lowering
their corporation tax rates. The below chart compares the rates of
Corporation Tax around the world (Miller
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Miller2017}{2017}).

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}c@{}}
\toprule
\includegraphics{ChapterPictures/7-3-EUCorpTaxRates.png}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\emph{Figure 7.3 - Corporation Tax Rates Around the
World}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

As can be seen in the chart, the UK's main rate of corporation tax will
decrease to 17\% in 2020. The stated objective of this reduction is to
create a more competitive corporate tax system to provide the right
conditions for business investment and growth. Government analysis
suggests that the change will reduce income to the Exchequer of £120
million in 2019-20 and £945 million in 2020-21 (HMRC
\protect\hyperlink{ref-HMRC2015}{2016}). The below chart from the
Institute of Fiscal Studies shows the revenue cost of past Corporate tax
rate reductions, and the projected cost of future cuts (Miller
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Miller2017}{2017}).

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}c@{}}
\toprule
\includegraphics{ChapterPictures/7-4-UKCorpTaxCuts.png}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\emph{Figure 7.4 - UK Corporation Tax Rate Cuts}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

The picture is similar elsewhere. In 2015, Japan, Spain, Israel, Norway
and Estonia decreased their corporation tax rates and Italy, France,
Japan and the UK had announced plans to do so.

These trends in corporate tax rate have a bearing on issues concerning
wealth and income inequality. Tax Justice campaigners have warned that
as governments reduce taxes on corporate profits, they have increased
the rates of VAT, fuel and car taxes. The below chart shows the increase
in the OECD average rate of VAT from 2000-2015. We can see a steady
increase in the VAT average after 2009.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}c@{}}
\toprule
\includegraphics{ChapterPictures/7-5-OECDVATRates.png}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\emph{Figure 7.5 - OECD Average standard VAT rates}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

VAT and fuel taxes disproportionately affect lower income earners.
According to the Tax Justice Network, ``Governments make up the
shortfall by levying higher taxes on other, less wealthy sections of
society, or by cutting back on essential public services.'' Another
concern is that if corporation tax reduces the return to company
shareholders, this will not only affect people with directly held
shares, but also older people with private pensions. This would suggest
that tax competition boosts inequality and deprivation.

\hypertarget{ring-fencing-bads}{%
\subsection{Ring Fencing Bads}\label{ring-fencing-bads}}

A final concern with the corporation system as it currently stands lies
in the ring fencing of domestic fossil fuel companies. Allowing marginal
relief on the profits made by these companies is, in fact, a subsidy on
their operations, and, in effect, a subsidy for the externalities which
their carbon intensive operations create.

With a stated commitment to lower UK emissions by 80\% by 2050, this tax
subsidy is clearly incompatible with national goals. It is arguable that
a rewrite of these tax policies could be instrumental in shifting
incentives for companies to produce fossil fuels. As it stands, however,
these incentives to lower carbon emissions and push a fuel shift towards
low-carbon sources do not exist within corporate tax policy.

\#9.4 Reform

It's clear then that what is needed to combat these significant issues
is substantial reform of the corporate tax system. In as much as the
space and issues around corporation tax are complex and challenging to
comprehend, so too is their reform. How best to balance the needs for
sufficient tax revenue against the increasingly mobile nature of
companies is a question that numerous academics and politicians have
tried to solve. Building on tax-based incentives to create social
`goods' is another layer of complexity in the mix.

With any question of reform, it is important first to establish the goal
to which we are working. With corporation tax, our ideal is thus. A
system of company taxation that rewards exporting companies and all
those that invest in physical capital expenditure in the UK. More
specifically, we're looking for a way to taxing the wealth and income of
the eventual owners of corporations. We would like to do this, so that
this group pay their fair share of taxation.

Any reforms should be applied in such a way that they are not easily
avoidable or evadable, and that treats companies fairly. Preventing an
international `race to the bottom' is also a key priority. International
cooperation on tax policy is the ideal, but designing a tax policy that
doesn't compete on lowering taxation rates is a strong alternative
solution. Supporting the creation of social `goods', most commonly
translated into discouraging bads, is also a core objective of any
reform. Lastly, creating an attractive environment for exporters, in the
short-term, would support the UK's historically poor trade performance.
We suggest a proposal that reforms VAT and existing corporation tax
system to achieve just this, through the unification of both components
under a company cash flow tax.

However, lets not walk before we can crawl. As with before, knowledge is
the most effective tool to start rebuilding any system. To this end
then, there are a number of possibilities for reform of corporation tax.
In this section, we'll outline a few of the main proposals for reform,
including unitary taxation, the cash-flow tax, and potential tax-rebates
for the creation of social goods, before moving on to discussing what
the optimal options would be for the society we'd like to create.

\hypertarget{options-for-reform}{%
\subsection{Options for reform}\label{options-for-reform}}

\#\#\#Unitary Taxation

A rose by any other name would smell as sweet. The same goes for Unitary
Taxation, or `Formulary apportionment' by its slightly more descriptive
title. In more basic terms, this method of taxation tries to tackle the
mobile nature of multinational corporations by allocating the profit
earned by corporations proportionally to the jurisdictions that they
operate in.

Fairness is the idea embedded at the very heart of this proposal. Fair
allocation of tax liability to a fair proportion of a multinational
corporation's business activities that are apportionable to a certain
geographical region.

To illustrate our point, imagine the following. A company with over
1,000 employees in Switzerland, and 1,000 in London is, you'd think,
liable to pay taxes in both of the regions designated. However, due to
the 2 well-sunned board members residing in the Cayman Islands, the
company is able to claim that the majority of their business operations
take place in this paradise of a tax-haven.

Said company, lets call it Peach, is able to legally avoid paying taxes
in the countries in which it operates in reality, by claiming that its
core business activities take place in a country that is conveniently
subject to a near 0\% corporate tax rate. This, it is clear, is a
loophole of the largest degree.

Unitary taxation could be the solution. This term describes a method by
which large corporations are taxed by allocating their profits to
different jurisdictions. This replaces a confusing plethora of different
methods and formulae for determining how much tax should be paid by
companies in certain jurisdictions with a single method for calculating
this liability. This is named something equally as compelling - the
Massachusetts formula.

The Massachusetts formula was initially proposed for use in the United
States for allocating the profits of corporations between various states
in which they are based. The formula takes the total worldwide profits
of a corporation, and then applies to this a weighting based on the
proportion of business operations which are located in each country or
other state in which they are based.

The weighting has three components: the proportion of sales, the
proportion of assets, and the proportion of employees that are in each
jurisdiction. We then take the average of these three weightings. This
average weighting is multiplied by the global profits to determine the
tax payable in the jurisdiction.

In mathematical terms, the corporation tax paid in jurisdiction i is
given by:

\[CorporationTax_{UK} = t_{CT} * Weighting_{UK} * Global Profits\]

where \(t_{CT}\) is the tax rate and

\[  Weighting_{UK} = \left( \frac{1}{3} \right)* \left( \frac{Sales_{UK}}{Global Sales} + \frac{Assets_{UK}}{Global Assets} + \frac{Employees_{UK}}{GlobalEmployees} \right)\]

This picture from the Tax Justice group illustrates the change in a
slightly more reader friendly format. As it demonstrates, the change in
unitary taxation would be to fairly apportion tax liabilities according
to the percentage of actual business operations that occur in different
regions. (Tax Justice \protect\hyperlink{ref-TaxJustice2019}{2019})

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics{C:/Users/Heather Mckay/Documents/GitHub/TaxHeaven/taxheaven/ChapterPictures/9-CorporationTax-unitarytax.PNG}
\caption{9-CorporationTax-unitarytax}
\end{figure}

The benefits of such a system are clear, and support for the system can
be interpreted as being broad. However, the simplified nature of the
calculation does not incorporate the difficulty of enforcing such a
policy, not the limiting of incentives for countries to relocate to
cheaper countries and export their goods and services to a UK market.
Another mechanism may be better suited to tackling these shortcomings,
and we shall explore this in the following section.

\#\#\#The Cashflow Tax

Another possibility for reform is the so-called Cashflow Tax, sometimes
referred to as the `Dyson Tax' in this book.

A cashflow tax is a tax on the difference between domestic (uk) sales
and domestic (uk) wages and supplier costs.

\[Cashflow Tax_{UK} = t_{CF} * (Sales_{UK} - Costs_{UK})\]

In the language of International tax, it has a `destination basis' for
sales and a `source base' for costs. Something can be counted as a UK
cost so long as tax has been paid on it. So, for example, UK employment
income would be counted as a taxable deduction so long as it was subject
to income tax.

Note that cashflow tax can be either positive or negative. If a company
locates in the UK but sells abroad, it may have a negative cashflow tax.
Thus the cashflow tax encourages companies to locate in the UK.
Conversely, if a company sells to the UK but has no UK costs, then it
will pay the cashflow tax on all of its sales. In effect, this would be
a sales tax not a profits tax. Thus it encourages business to locate in
the UK; with the higher the tax rate, the greater the incentive to move.

Thus the cashflow tax satisfies two of our requirements for reform: it
reverses the race to the bottom and it gives a boost in the short term
to UK manufacturing. Whilst unitary taxation is also a good option, the
cashflow tax fulfils more of our objectives.

\#\#\#Integrating Cashflow Tax and VAT

Since the cashflow tax operates on the `destination' basis for revenue,
it is similar in some way to a Value Added Tax, but where UK wage costs
are deductible.

Given that we also propose to introduce a comprehensive system of
environmental taxation (see later chapter), it might make sense to
integrate our corporation tax system with our system of VAT. Assuming a
cashflow tax rate of 40\% for domestic firms, how should imports be
considered? Under the VAT system, there is a tax on imports and a
subsidy on exports. But it is not as high as 40\%.

We propose that cooperative tax nations would pay only a 20\% rate on
imports.\footnote{Corresponding to a 25\% VAT rate, as the definition is
  inverse} This means in effect that payments made to compliant
countries would be half-deductible for the purpose of coherence and
ease. This clause would not apply to tax havens, which would lack all
deductibility so as to discourage use.

\hypertarget{conclusions-4}{%
\subsection{Conclusions}\label{conclusions-4}}

We propose to replace Corporation Tax and VAT with a `cash flow' tax and
taxation at source of all dividends. Whereas a corporation tax is a tax
on `economic profit', a cash flow tax is a tax on net receipts
(i.e.~retained cash flow). Cash-flow is a destination basis corporate
tax, exempting exporters, capital investment and R\&D but including
interest payments. The basis of the cash flow tax is UK sales and
borrowing minus costs, dividends, interest and principal repayments. It
therefore exempts capital expenditure and exports. It is similar to a
value added tax, where wage expenditures are deductible. The advantage
of the cash flow tax is that can be applied to the financial sector and
it encourages investment and exporters. With corporation tax, companies
can move the jurisdiction they are registered in, and charge losses to
high-tax locations and profits to low tax locations. With a cash flow
tax, all sales in the UK are taxed, and only UK wage payments are
deductible. It applies to all companies that sell in the UK, and
`transfer pricing' becomes irrelevant. It avoids the international `race
to the bottom' among corporate tax rates.

****- Publicly quoted companies should have the option to pay the cash
flow tax in shares. These shares would accrue to a sovereign wealth fund
which would pay the Citizen's Dividend.- A `monopoly charge' of 5\% of
the company value (proportional to value added sold to UK
consumers,i.e.~like VAT) would be imposed on all large companies and on
trusts. This tax would be payable in shares to a sovereign wealth fund
for children, so that1/20th of the shares of a company or trust would go
to such a fund per year.- International wealth transparency tax of 0.1\%
of assets greater than 5 million pounds- Capital Gains Tax: If the tax
paid on retained earnings is less than the average tax paid on
dividends, company owners will have an incentive to retain those
earnings within the company. The owner of the shares could later sell
them. They would therefore pay less tax than if the earnings had been
paid out as dividends. Capital gains tax on ~shares ownership can be
thought of as a crude way to prevent tax avoidance through this route.
Capital gains tax also allows those who have achieved unearned capital
value increases (for example, due to the fall in long-term interest
rates) to contribute properly. Capital gains tax rates should be set
consistently to ~avoid tax advantages or disadvantages based on legal
structure. - Applying an Immigration and Citizenship charge****

\newpage

\hypertarget{part-10-land-and-property}{%
\section{PART 10: LAND AND PROPERTY}\label{part-10-land-and-property}}

\hypertarget{summary-4}{%
\subsection{Summary}\label{summary-4}}

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  In the UK, buying a house is extremely and increasingly unaffordable
  for many. This is contributing to other problems, such as
  homelessness.
\item
  High house prices are due to high land values. House prices go through
  boom-and-bust cycles due to land price speculation. This is when
  people buy land in the hope that it will go up in value. This is not a
  productive investment, one that leads to economic growth, but rather
  is a `pseudo-investment' or placement.
\item
  Landowners get free value from the work of the community, such as the
  building of public transit infrastructure or community investment in
  local parks. Landowners receive an increase in land values from these
  external activities, which they themselves have done no work to
  create.
\item
  Land Value Tax is an effective solution to this unfairness, and to the
  housing boom-and-bust cycle. It is a tax on land values.
\item
  LVT is a well-established idea, with multiple benefits. It faces some
  obstacles, for which there are solutions. The biggest may be political
  feasibility.
\item
  Land has been neglected in neoclassical economic theory, and generally
  is conflated with capital. However, land differs from capital in
  important ways. Many current economic problems have arisen from a
  failure to recognise this distinction.
\end{itemize}

\hypertarget{how-bad-is-the-housing-affordability-problem-in-the-uk}{%
\section{10.1 How bad is the housing affordability problem in the
UK?}\label{how-bad-is-the-housing-affordability-problem-in-the-uk}}

\newthought{The affordability of housing} is frequently the topic of
national debate, but as housing charity Shelter UK warn, we risk
becoming so accustomed to the high cost of housing that we end up seeing
it simply as a fact of life (Shelter
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Shelter2010}{2010}).

The most recent review into this topic was conducted by Lloyds Bank, who
found that home affordability (i.e.~the ratio between average house
prices and local earnings) across UK cities ``has hit its worst level in
eight years'' (Lloyds Bank
\protect\hyperlink{ref-LloydsBank2016}{2016}). The report found that the
average UK city house price had risen in 2016 to its highest-ever level
of £211,880. Average affordability in the last twelve months had
increased from 6.2 to 6.6 times annual average earnings. Most notably,
the researchers found no cities in the South of England where house
prices are less than 7.5 times the average local income.

The below chart shows how the ratio of UK house price to real earnings
has changed over time.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}c@{}}
\toprule
\includegraphics{ChapterPictures/8-1-RealWagesvsHousePrices.png}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\emph{Figure 10.1 - Real Wages vs House Prices}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

The ratio is the highest it has been since April 2008, at the beginning
of the great recession. We can see below that it is particularly hard
for first-time buyers to afford a house in London.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}c@{}}
\toprule
\begin{minipage}[b]{0.97\columnwidth}\centering
\includegraphics{ChapterPictures/8-2-Firsttimebuyer.png}\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.97\columnwidth}\centering
Figure 10.2 - First time buyer earnings to house price ratio across the
UK*\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

The below chart shows that the gap between the most and the least
affordable local authorities has increased since 2002, and this is due
to the least affordable areas moving further away from the overall
affordability ratio (ONS
\protect\hyperlink{ref-ONS2016a}{2016}\protect\hyperlink{ref-ONS2016a}{a}).

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}c@{}}
\toprule
\begin{minipage}[b]{0.97\columnwidth}\centering
\includegraphics{ChapterPictures/8-3-Housepriceaffordability.png}\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.97\columnwidth}\centering
Figure 10.3 - House price affordability compared between Burnley and
London*\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

There have also been many demographic changes in housing ownership. The
chart below shows the percentage of each age group that are home owners,
from 1981 to 2014 (Ough \protect\hyperlink{ref-Ough2016}{2016}).

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}c@{}}
\toprule
\begin{minipage}[b]{0.97\columnwidth}\centering
\includegraphics{ChapterPictures/8-4-Percentageownershipbyage.png}\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.97\columnwidth}\centering
\emph{Figure 10.4 - Percentage of each age group that are home owners in
England, 1981-2014}\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

We can see a dramatic reduction in the percentage of people between the
ages of 34-44 owning homes, and an increase in the percentage of over
65s owning homes.

\hypertarget{the-human-impact}{%
\subsection{The Human Impact}\label{the-human-impact}}

The rising cost of housing is also contributing to growing inequality of
wealth. The chart below shows the upper bounds of household net property
wealth for each 1\% of the net property wealth distribution in 2012.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}c@{}}
\toprule
\includegraphics{ChapterPictures/8-5-Householdnetpropertywealth2012.png}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
Figure 10..5 - Upper bounds of household net property wealth in
2012*\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

The graph above shows dramatic inequality in property wealth, but it
still does not capture the devastating personal effect that unaffordable
housing is having on British people. Shelter UK warns that:

\begin{quote}
\emph{``Unaffordable housing plays a vital role in changing the way
people live and constraining their choices\ldots{}the high cost of
housing is having an impact on all aspects of life, and raises the
prospect that, as a result of a collective failure to find solutions, we
could be allowing ourselves to drift into a future where we will all
ultimately be worse off.''} (Shelter
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Shelter2010}{2010})
\end{quote}

A staggering 44\% of working families in England (3.7 million families)
have had to cut back on essential food and clothing to help pay their
rent or mortgage. A further 41\% say that housing costs cause them
stress and depression (Shelter England
\protect\hyperlink{ref-ShelterEngland2016}{2016}). With so many families
having to cut back on food and heating expenditures in order to pay for
housing costs, it's clear that this is a problem striking at the heart
of citizens' well-being.

\hypertarget{case-study-michelle-and-kevin}{%
\subsection{Case Study: Michelle and
Kevin}\label{case-study-michelle-and-kevin}}

Michelle and Kevin rent a small home in Cambridge, where they live with
their two children. Kevin works full-time for a cleaning company, while
Michelle studies for a career in criminal justice. Kevin had previously
been self-employed and his income had dropped so low that they fell
behind on rent. With Kevin now in full-time employment, they still
struggle to get by.

\begin{quote}
\emph{``Even though my husband has a new job now and works as many hours
as he can, it's constantly hand-to-mouth. We've cut back on everything
to help pay the rent - including food. When the children are at school,
the heating isn't on at all, and we only ever buy clothes when we
absolutely have to because the little ones have grown out of
something.''}
\end{quote}

Millions of people are experiencing that major life decisions, such as
moving out of their parents' homes into their own home, or starting a
family, are being affected by the lack of affordable housing. 21\% of
people aged 18 to 44 said they were delaying having children because of
a lack of affordable housing. Worryingly, 36\% of this group expected
that housing costs would prevent them from starting a family for at
least another four years. Shelter UK notes that this will create
knock-on effects for the NHS and other public services, as women are
forced to delay pregnancy into their less-fertile years:

\begin{quote}
\emph{``If women continue to put off starting a family because of
housing costs, this could drive up the numbers experiencing fertility
problems, putting more people through the trauma of being unable to
conceive. As well as the obvious human impacts, such an outcome could
also result in additional financial costs to the NHS in the form of
increased demand for fertility treatment.''} (Shelter England
\protect\hyperlink{ref-ShelterEngland2016}{2016})
\end{quote}

One of the most surprising findings was that 24\% of adults have been
forced into continuing to live with a partner they are no longer
conjugal with, because they cannot afford to move out, or know someone
who has been in this situation. Housing costs are also causing many
adults to move back in with their parents, or delay ever moving out at
all. At the other end of the age spectrum, housing costs are also making
it difficult for adult children to live near to, and care for, their
aging parents.

\hypertarget{case-study-alan}{%
\subsection{Case Study : Alan}\label{case-study-alan}}

Alan lives with his wife in Portsmouth and is an architect. Both of
their parents live in Bournemouth. His wife's parents are becoming
increasingly frail. Alan and his wife would like to move back to
Bournemouth, but their house is in negative equity and house prices in
Portsmouth are too high for them.

\begin{quote}
\emph{``We can't see any improvement in our situation in the short to
medium term. What we really fear is that time is not on our side.''}
\end{quote}

\hypertarget{the-cause-of-the-housing-crisis}{%
\section{10.2 The Cause of the Housing
Crisis}\label{the-cause-of-the-housing-crisis}}

If you were riding in a London cab, and were to ask the driver why the
cost of buying housing in London is so high, he might say, 'Well, its
obvious! It's supply and demand! There is a huge demand for housing in
London. Lots of people want to live here!" At face value, this
explanation sounds very reasonable; but if I thought a little harder, I
might wonder why the cost of other things doesn't increase in the same
way.

The best way to think of this is by picturing another product, like
mobile phones. There is very high demand for mobile phones. Almost
everyone has one, and like housing, they are generally considered a
necessity. However, the cost of phones doesn't keep going up and up. Why
not?

Moreover, we know the housing market has boom and bust cycles, where
housing price increase for years and years, and then suddenly start
dropping (i.e.~housing prices go through boom and bust cycles). Why
don't the price trajectories of mobile phones do that?

There is a key difference between housing and mobile phones.
Phone-makers can increase the supply of phones essentially at will to
meet demand. Housing is different. Housing has to be built on land, and
the supply of land is essentially fixed (notwithstanding the impressive
achievements of the Netherlands in converting seabottom into land by
building dikes and pumping away the water from shallow seas). The taxi
driver was right in comprehending that this is an issue of supply and
demand. When demand for phones increases, we can increase supply. Prices
will stay the same, or even decrease, if an over-supply is generated by
competing phone-makers, or process improvements reduce production costs.
In stark contrast, when demand for housing increases, as it must when
populations increase, we cannot increase the amount of land to build on,
so the price of housing (house and land) increases indefinitely. Given
rising populations, housing prices are a one-way ratchet.

Though we talk about `house prices' increasing, it would make more sense
to speak of `land prices' increasing. The supply of land is the factor
causing the combined cost of house + land prices to increase - not the
cost of actually constructing a house. If we look at valuations in UK
regions with high `house prices,' we see that the land value is much
higher than the value of the building sitting on it.

As campaigner Edward J. Dodson states,

\begin{quote}
*``Actually,''house" prices are not increasing. A housing unit is a form
of capital good, and all capital goods depreciate over time. The actual
value of a house is best defined as its replacement cost, less any
depreciation. Thus, the potential selling price of a house has
everything to do with the owner's ongoing maintenance and periodic
replacement of systems \ldots{}. Ongoing efficiencies in the production
of the materials that go into constructing a housing unit have resulted
in a reduction in construction costs per square foot.``*
\end{quote}

\begin{quote}
\emph{``One need look no farther than land acquisition costs for an
explanation of why a residential property is an impossible acquisition
for a growing segment of the population.''} (Shaxson
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Shaxson2016}{2016})
\end{quote}

If you're not convinced, consideFigure 10.8.6 below (Wightman
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Wightman2013}{2013}). This graph compares four
important costs relating to housing, and shows how they have changed
over time. The lowest line on the graph, `Build Costs,' is the cost of
actually constructing a house. `House Price' is the value of the house
only, and `Land Price' is the value of the underlying land only.
`Earnings' show the population's average earnings.

We see that while the cost of building houses has remained largely
stable between 1986 and 2007, land prices have oscillated dramatically
through a boom and bust cycle. The `House Price' line is most revealing
because, while the costs of building houses has stayed the same, the
cost of buying them has oscillated - mirroring the `Land Price' line
(Lloyd \protect\hyperlink{ref-Lloyd2009}{2009}).

\textbar{}\includegraphics{ChapterPictures/8-6-Indexofhousingmarketcosts1983-2007.png}\textbar{}
\textbar{}:--:\textbar{}Figure 10. 8.6 - Index of housing market costs
1983-2007*\textbar{}

\hypertarget{why-then-the-boom-and-bust-cycle}{%
\subsection{Why then the boom and bust
cycle?}\label{why-then-the-boom-and-bust-cycle}}

As the population increases, the demand for housing increases. Supply
doesn't increase, so we would expect the price to steadily increase. Why
then do we see a boom and bust cycle?

This is because of `land price speculation,' whereby people buy land in
the anticipation that its price will increase. This is a kind of bet
(and a fairly safe one at that). When lots of people buy up land because
they think the price will go up, it pushes the price up further. There
is a fixed quantity of land, so supply cannot respond to demand. It is
very difficult, in this environment, for someone to buy a home to live
in, because there are plenty of people in the market who simply want
land as a way of making money. The price continues to rise until some
form of shock occurs, and the value suddenly plummets as people exit the
market. After some time, the price starts to climb again as speculators'
confidence returns, and they again believe that the land price will
increase. So speculation increases the demand for land and causes prices
to increase faster and faster.

These land price speculators are treating land as a kind of
`investment.' However, land is not an investment in an economic sense,
because no new product or service is produced. No improvement is made.
They simply sit on their ownership titles to land, hoping it will
increase in value so they can sell it or borrow against it somewhat
later in time.

The impact of land speculation on people who want to buy homes to live
in and for renters is obvious. The price of homes goes up and up, and so
does the cost of renting. This is also a loss for the economy generally,
as money from people's monthly income is spent on rent rather than on
other things, which reduces demand for consumer products and hence the
jobs involved in producing them. And investors' money is not put into
productive investments which benefit the economy, such as new
businesses; instead, it is tied up in land speculation.

\hypertarget{fairness-and-land-values}{%
\section{10.3 Fairness and land values}\label{fairness-and-land-values}}

We mentioned that one cause of increased house and land prices is
population increase. However, that's not the full story. There are other
reasons why some areas may become more in demand and increase in value.
In rural communities, it may be, for example, that farmers work to the
improve the land itself, say by using new techniques to make the soil
more fertile. In most cases though, and particularly in urban areas,
land value goes up without the owner making any improvements to the land
itself.

One reason why the value of the land goes up is because of the work of
other members of the community in developing the area around a
particular piece of land. A bustling high street, cafes, improved public
transport, well-kept parks - these are all examples of developments
which can come to surround a piece of land and thereby increase its
value, even if the owner of that piece of land has made no improvements
to it at all. A location tends to become more desirable as a place to
live and work because of government and community activity and
investment. That is why we may sometimes exchange the term `location
value' for `land value.'

Of course the opposite can sometimes occur. We have seen from the
experience of the American mid-west that land values can plummet when
important local infrastructure or businesses close down, and a local
area becomes a less desirable place to live.

The general trend, though, is for land values to increase. In many
cases, a landowner captures a great deal of financial value due to the
work of the wider community, without himself incurring any expense or
effort. It is appropriate for us to reflect on the fairness of this
arrangement.

Let us consider some scenarios:

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  If a noisy road is built close to a man's house, and the value of his
  land and property decreases as a result, is that fair on him?\\
\item
  If the public as a whole, via the government, create beautiful parks
  and amenities close to a woman's land, and this causes her land to
  increase in value, is it fair that she keeps the value?
\end{itemize}

Consider that the rents which her tenants pay may also go up as a
result. They have to pay more to live there, but their landlord's land
goes up in value. She receives both increased rents and an increase in
land value. Is that fair?

\hypertarget{the-jubilee-line-example}{%
\subsection{The Jubilee Line example}\label{the-jubilee-line-example}}

When the Jubilee Line on the London Underground was created, it cost the
public purse £3.5bn. The value of the land around the line's stations
shot up by an estimated £13bn (Riley and Centre for Land Policy Studies.
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Riley2001}{2001}), and it was private landowners
who gained that extra value(Mitchell and Vickers
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Mitchell}{2003}). In particular, the land value
around Canary Wharf station increased by £2.8bn, while the land value
around Southwark station increased by £800 million (Transport for London
\protect\hyperlink{ref-TransportforLondon2004}{2004}). This was an
increase in land values that landowners adjacent to the Jubilee Line
stations had done nothing to create. The public paid for the amenity,
and those landowners received a windfall. Is that fair? Should all or at
least some of that windfall benefit be shared with the public?

Great minds have already considered this matter. Winston Churchill made
his viewpoint clear:

\begin{quote}
\emph{``Roads are made, streets are made, services are improved,
electric light turns night into day, water is brought from reservoirs a
hundred miles off in the mountains, and all the while the landlord sits
still. Every one of those improvements is affected by the labour and
cost of other people and the taxpayers. To not one of those improvements
does the land monopolist, as a land monopolist, contribute, and yet by
every one of them the value of his land is enhanced.''}
\end{quote}

\begin{quote}
\emph{``He renders no service to the community, he contributes nothing
to the general welfare, he contributes nothing to the process from which
his own enrichment is derived \ldots{} the unearned increment on the
land is reaped by the land monopolist in exact proportion, not to the
service, but to the disservice done.''}
\end{quote}

John Stuart Mill similarly wrote in 1848,

\begin{quote}
\emph{``Landlords grow rich in their sleep without working, risking, or
economising. The increase in the value of land, arising as it does from
the efforts of an entire community, should belong to the community, and
not to the individual who might hold title.''} (Mill
\protect\hyperlink{ref-mill1848principles}{1848})
\end{quote}

More recently, the writer George Monbiot wrote,

\begin{quote}
\emph{``(T)hose who own the land skim wealth from everyone else, without
exertion or enterprise. They levy a toll upon all other forms of wealth
and every form of industry'' }
\end{quote}

As mentioned, this form of unearned land value increase is particularly
prevalent in urban locations. It is less relevant to agricultural
locations, where the work done by a farmer does little to affect the
value of her neighbour's land.

Before we consider in detail how to best address the unique situation of
land, and the problems currently associated with it, let us lighten the
mood and discuss board games.

\hypertarget{the-case-of-monopoly}{%
\section{10.4 The case of Monopoly}\label{the-case-of-monopoly}}

Monopoly is a fun game to play, but not necessarily one that leads to
familial harmony, at least when playing the standard rules. We all know
how Monopoly works - everyone has some starting cash and goes about
buying up properties, building houses, and charging rent. As players
move around the board, they land on properties and pay rent to whoever
owns them. In the end, one person owes everything, and everyone else is
left penniless. This is a parable for our present economy.

Rather less commonly known is the fact that Monopoly was preceded by and
evolved from another game, called `The Landlord's Game,' invented and
patented by Elizabeth Magie.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}c@{}}
\toprule
\begin{minipage}[b]{0.97\columnwidth}\centering
\includegraphics{ChapterPictures/8-7-Monopoly.jpg}\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.97\columnwidth}\centering
\emph{Figure 10.7 - The Original Monopoly was first called The
Landlord's Game and invented by Elizabeth Magie}\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

This state of affairs is also present when oligopolies exist.\footnote{A
  state of limited competition, in which a market is shared by a small
  number of producers or sellers.}

Magie's game had two sets of rules of play. The first set of rules is
similar to the rules of Monopoly, and similarly led to extreme
instability, with the whole board monopolised by one player, and the
other players forced into penury and bankruptcy.

The second set of rules in The Landlord's Game led to a very different
outcome. The game, when played by these rules, led to a stable and
admittedly boring game with no clear winner. Everyone ended up with
something. Not quite world peace, or even family peace, but economic
peace - at least within the confines of the game.

So what were the different rules that lead to a much more stable
economic outcome?

The `economically stable' rules involved a tax levied by the central
authorities on the value of the land owned by each individual, and
distributed back through public services or a per-capita dividend. This
is sometimes called a `site valuation tax' or a `location value tax,'
but is most often referred to as a `land-value tax.'

\hypertarget{land-value-tax}{%
\section{10.5 Land Value Tax}\label{land-value-tax}}

\hypertarget{history}{%
\subsection{History}\label{history}}

Elizabeth Magie intended her game to demonstrate that a single tax on
land values could lead to a sustainable economic system in which all
benefited. This is the kind of tax we are proposing.

Magie was not the originator of this concept. She was espousing the
ideas of a 19th Century self-taught economist named Henry George, who
argued that a single tax on land values would be both efficient and
fair. It would be \emph{fair} because it taxed unearned increases in
land values which occur not as a result of individual effort or
ingenuity, but because of development of infrastructure and the wider
economy. It would be \emph{efficient} because the quantity of land does
not change. He suggested that when we tax labour (via income tax) or tax
economic activity via sales tax and corporate taxes, we discourage these
activities and thereby make the economy less productive. Taxing land
values instead might discourage people from speculating on land, and
this would be a good thing, as it would free up funds for more
productive investment and free up land for more beneficial purposes.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}c@{}}
\toprule
\includegraphics{ChapterPictures/8-8-GeorgeSign.jpg}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\emph{Figure 10.8 - Everybody works but the vacant lot}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

George presented his ideas in a bestselling book, `Progress and
Poverty,' and the case for a land value tax was taken up by great
thinkers and politicians, including the Russian novelist Leo Tolstoy and
British politicians Winston Churchill and David Lloyd George. It was
only the intervention of the first World War that prevented the tax
being implemented in the UK. The ``people's budget'' was passed by the
pre-war government, but had not yet been implemented by the outbreak of
World War I. After the war, the new government had different priorities,
and the tax was never implemented.

Though he popularised the single land tax, Henry George could be seen as
a follower of the great classical economists. Adam Smith, David Ricardo,
John Stuart Mill, and Karl Marx all supported land value tax or public
ownership of land. David Ricardo developed both the theory and
recommendations in 1817 in his monograph `On the Principles of Political
Economy and Taxation.' A land value tax was considered the first point
of the political program of Marx. The importance and optimality of a
land value tax was one of the few things the great classical economists
agreed on.

In the 20th Century, the idea of a single tax on land values was
espoused by economist Frank Ramsey (Ramsey
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Ramsey1927}{1927}). He explained that if any one
commodity is absolutely inelastic, either for supply or for demand, the
whole of the revenue should be collected off it (Putland
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Putland2013}{2013}). To clarify, when a commodity
is inelastic for supply, this means that its supply is (not very)
sensitive to changes in price. Likewise, a commodity which is inelastic
for demand is one whose demand is not greatly sensitive to changes in
price. Oxygen in the air, needed for people to breathe, is an example of
a commodity which is demand inelastic (but fortunately it is a part of
the commons, freely provided by nature, and not a ``commodity'' in a
financially valuated sense). However, there is one commodity which is
supply inelastic: Land. Some marginal tinkering by Dutch dike-builders
notwithstanding, and ignoring for now the future impacts of rising sea
levels due to increased greenhouse gas concentrations, one cannot, in
general, increase or decrease the amount of land in existence.

That's why many economists over many years have recommended a land value
tax, often considering it an `ideal' tax. The arguments in favour of the
the tax include arguments based on justice as well as arguments based on
economic pragmatism. Land Value Tax is rare in this respect.

\hypertarget{benefits-of-land-value-tax}{%
\section{10.6 Benefits of Land Value
Tax}\label{benefits-of-land-value-tax}}

Land Value Tax is very much alive within taxation discussion today, and
is advocated across the political spectrum. Greens MP Caroline Lucas
described Land Value Tax as ``sensible, efficient, effective and
progressive.'' In the final report of the Mirrlees review (J. Mirrlees
and IFS \protect\hyperlink{ref-Mirrlees2010}{2010}), the economic case
for land value tax was described as ``simple, and almost undeniable.''

The Mirrlees review of the tax system was commissioned by the Institute
for Fiscal Studies in 2010/11. It brought together internationally
renowned experts and researchers to:

\begin{quote}
\emph{``identify the characteristics of a good tax system for any open,
developed economy in the 21st Century, assess the extent to which the UK
tax system conforms to these ideals, and recommend how it might
realistically be reformed in that direction.''}
\end{quote}

The review wrote extensively about the merits of land value tax. A
section of their findings is below.

\begin{quote}
\emph{``The economic case for taxing land itself is very strong, and
there is a long history of arguments in favour of it. Taxing land
ownership is equivalent to taxing an economic rent - to do so does not
discourage any desirable activity. Land is not a produced input; its
supply is fixed, and cannot be affected by the introduction of a tax.
With the same amount of land available, people would not be willing to
pay any more for it than before, so (the present value of) a land value
tax (LVT) would be reflected one-for-one in a lower price of land: the
classic example of tax capitalization.''}
\end{quote}

\begin{quote}
\emph{``Owners of land on the day such a tax is announced would suffer a
windfall loss as the value of their asset was reduced. But this windfall
loss is the only effect of the tax: the incentive to buy, develop, or
use land would not change. Economic activity that was previously
worthwhile remains worthwhile. Moreover, a tax on land value would also
capture the benefits accruing to landowners from external developments
rather than their own efforts.''} (IFS,
\protect\hyperlink{ref-IFS}{n.d.})
\end{quote}

Along with the economic efficiency argument, there are other arguments
in favour of Land Value Tax. A summary is found below.

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\tightlist
\item
  Funding infrastructure: Increases in land tax can be used to fund
  better infrastructure.
\item
  Difficult to avoid/evade: The owners of land cannot re-declare it as
  being held in an offshore haven. The tax is based on the location of
  the land, not on the location of the individual owning it.
\item
  Natural rights: Individual work (labour) is naturally owned by the
  person who did the work, whereas land and natural resources are
  naturally unowned, or shared by all.
\item
  Fairness: Societies that tax land prevent individuals making an
  economic return simply by sitting on the land as others create
  improvements around them.
\item
  Incentives to invest productively: If individuals and companies can
  make money simply by owning land, they will not feel the need to
  invest in the real economy. Land Value Tax incentivises those with
  wealth to invest in productive investments.
\item
  Economic stability: Speculation on the value of land is associated
  with credit-based booms and busts. For example, the Japanese late 80's
  boom and 90's bust, or the recent `great recession,' which resulted
  from the bursting of a massive property speculation bubble in the U.S.
\item
  House price stability: A Land Value Tax could help to stabilise house
  prices, giving incentives against disproportionate amounts of capital
  being tied up in property and unsustainable accumulation of mortgage
  debt. That is, people who are just holding land because they expect
  the land value to increase, will have an incentive to either use the
  land productively or sell it. Simply holding it will become too
  expensive.
\item
  Benefit to local government: Taxing land values can enable some of the
  increase in value that results from a prosperous economy and public
  investments to be captured by local government. This can provide an
  incentive for local authorities to support economic growth and
  development, and potentially could become an efficient way of
  financing infrastructure projects (Wightman
  \protect\hyperlink{ref-Wightman2013}{2013}).\footnote{Alternatively, a
    national land tax would naturally redistribute from one region to
    another, but then you'd lose the local connection.}
\item
  Removal of counterproductive taxes: Many taxes discourage productive
  behaviors which we should instead be incentivising. Land Value Tax
  would allow us to do away with some of these distorting taxes.
  Nicholas Boles puts it succinctly in a Financial Times article (Boles
  \protect\hyperlink{ref-Boles}{2011}):
\end{enumerate}

\begin{quote}
\emph{``The Holy Grail for every Treasury economist is a tax that costs
little to collect and does not reduce people's incentives to do the
things that we want them to do\ldots{} Land Value Tax does not
discourage productive behaviour, but would enable us to do away with
counterproductive taxes on labour, production, dwellings, other capital,
and commerce.''} (Gaffney \protect\hyperlink{ref-Gaffney2009}{2009})
\end{quote}

\hypertarget{does-experience-bear-out-the-theory}{%
\section{10.7 Does experience bear out the
theory?}\label{does-experience-bear-out-the-theory}}

As indicated above, proponents claim that land value taxation can reduce
real estate speculation and volatility in house prices. There are two
ways in which LVT might have such an effect.

The first has already been outlined. When house prices start rising, LVT
bills will rise commensurately. If a plot of land is not generating an
income sufficient to defray the tax, rising bills may become
unaffordable. Cumulative LVT bills will also reduce any capital gain the
landowner may hope to receive one day by selling the land. Those with
under-developed land (that is, land which has a more profitable
permitted use) such as land-bankers will therefore have a motive either
to put the land to a more active and profitable use, such as housing (or
higher-density housing), or else to put it on the market, thereby making
it available to those willing and able to develop it.

Thus in theory LVT should discourage land-banking, and may help to
reduce upward price-volatility in the housing market by increasing the
supply of new housing when prices start to rise.

It is difficult to demonstrate through comparison studies (i.e.~studies
comparing times or places with and without LVT) that adoption of land
value taxation is associated with higher rates of construction.
Differences in population growth, interest rates, and other taxes are
just some of many variables which confound such comparisons. Dye \&
England (2010) in a sympathetic report on land value taxation noted:

\begin{quote}
\emph{``Some advocates of land value taxation rely on comparison studies
to predict greater building activity in communities adopting a land
value tax, but they are making hopeful assertions rather than offering
convincing evidence.''}
\end{quote}

The second way LVT might help to stabilise house prices is by helping to
offset the effect of buyers' expectations regarding future prices.
Expectations of future rises or falls in price can become
self-fulfilling, as they increase or decrease what buyers are willing to
pay today.

According to economic theory, the `fundamental' price of property
reflects the present discounted value of future returns (returns are
rents paid to the owner, or if one is using the land oneself - living on
it, generally speaking - then the financial value of avoiding having to
pay rent to someone). Future revenues are discounted to allow for `time
preference,' uncertainty, mortgage costs, and so forth. Fundamental
prices tend to rise over time owing to economic growth, but when actual
prices exceed fundamental prices, it denotes a speculative bubble caused
by self-fulfilling expectations.

LVT costs (and other property taxation) affect future returns from
owning a house, and so should cause a discount in house prices. In other
words, the tax should be `capitalised' into house prices. Thus when
house-prices escalate, expectations of higher future LVT costs should in
theory abate buyers' willingness to pay current prices, reducing upward
volatility. Conversely, when house-prices threaten to fall, expectations
of lower future LVT costs should bolster buyers' willingness to pay
current prices, reducing downward volatility.

It is complicated to demonstrate empirically that property taxes are
indeed capitalised into house prices. Studies which try to correlate tax
rates and property values must contend with numerous confounding
variables. For example, a high tax rate may be a consequence and not a
cause of low property values, if the municipality needs to raise a
certain level of revenue to pay for local services. One must also allow
for the possibility that local property taxes may not be significantly
capitalised into house prices if home-buyers feel that the tax burden is
indemnified by a commensurate level of local services.

Still, some rigorous studies have found evidence that property taxes are
indeed capitalised into long term or `equilibrium' house prices
(e.g.~Yinger et al, 1988). The question at hand, however, is the effect
of LVT not on long term prices, but on short term price movements.

In Taxes \& Speculative Behaviour in Real Estate Markets (1992), K. E.
Case addressed the -

\hypertarget{the-case-of-estonia}{%
\subsection{The Case of Estonia}\label{the-case-of-estonia}}

Estonia experienced a real estate boom and bust between 2003 and 2009,
despite having a local land value tax which was introduced in 1993
shortly after establishment of a private property market in the wake of
Estonian independence. Nominal rates vary between 0.1\% and 2.5\% of a
plot's `highest' or `best' market value. However, because LVT
re-assessments have been only sporadic, occurring in 1996 and then for
the last time in 2001, effective tax rates have generally fluctuated
inversely with prices. Some municipalities even used a regulation
introduced in 2002 to lower tax rates on properties in high value areas.

Cocconcelli and Medda (2012) showed using econometric tests that the
Estonian real estate boom represented a speculative bubble. They also
showed that if an asset pricing model had been implemented in which tax
bills had followed annual assessments to track market changes, LVT would
have significantly affected house-buyers' attitude to price. That is to
say, the effects of the tax would have been significantly capitalised
into prices, reducing volatility.

However, because in reality LVT assessments were sporadic, even large
changes in market prices left LVT bills unchanged for a long and
indefinite period. As a result, house-buyers, especially speculators,
did not take the effects of the land value tax into great account. This
curtailed any stabilising effect of LVT on house prices. Thus
Cocconcelli and Medda conclude that the Estonian land tax failed to act
as ``a protective buffer'' against a real estate bubble because it was
not implemented ``correctly.''

\hypertarget{denmark}{%
\subsection{Denmark}\label{denmark}}

Denmark is another country which suffered from a speculative housing
bubble in the mid-2000s despite taxing land value. Moreover, in a paper
on ``the advantages of stabilising housing taxation,'' Klein et al
(2016) detect signs of a new bubble in certain Danish cities such as
Copenhagen, where price rises for flats have recently exceeded 10\%
year-on-year.

As well as a municipal land tax with an average rate of 2.4\%, Denmark
has a `property value tax,' which is levied at 1\% of a property' entire
market value up to a certain threshold, and then 3\% on the excess.
However, the tax was frozen in 2001, and so ceased to track changes in
market prices long before the start of the speculative bubble in the
mid-2000s. The average effective rate is now 0.55\% and effective rates
are lowest in the cities which are showing signs of a new housing
bubble.

Nor does Denmark's municipal land tax necessarily track changes in
market prices: Assessments may be three years out of date, and
year-on-year increases are capped. Thus, for example, when house prices
were plummeting in the period 2008-10, land tax demands rose, because
they were still catching up with the huge rise in property values of the
preceding period. According to the calculations of Klein et al. (2016),
the failure of Denmark's two property taxes to track market changes has
increased volatility in the Danish real estate market by 22\%.

\hypertarget{practical-implementation}{%
\section{10.8 Practical Implementation}\label{practical-implementation}}

\hypertarget{valuation-methodology}{%
\subsection{Valuation Methodology}\label{valuation-methodology}}

Implementation of a land value tax would require regular valuation of
land parcels. This would have to occur in such a way that the taxable
valuation excludes the value of any buildings or other `improvements'
made to the land. Critics of Land Value Tax have frequently suggested
that the need to provide accurate land valuations is an insurmountable
obstacle because of this.

Yet in reality, it can be done quite straightforwardly, at least in the
period preceding the introduction of land value taxes, by substraction
of the value of the buildings on the land from the current market price
of land-and-buildings (or an average of the market price over, say, the
previous three years). The value of the buildings can be calculated by
assessing the cost of replacing the existing buildings after
depreciation (i.e.~after adjusting for their condition: dilapidated,
average, or high-standard).

Determining replacement building construction costs per square meter for
a given category of house is not difficult - this can easily be based on
available empirical data. A national statistics bureau would maintain
frequently updated schedules of regional construction cost data per sq m
of different classes of buildings, specifying median construction costs
per square meter. The total size in sq m of the house would be measured.
This allows a simple calculation of the standard median cost of
constructing a replacement for the existing building. In a final step,
assessors would take into account the condition of the land, and apply a
suitable depreciation multiplier between 0.0 (for a house that is a ruin
that will be torn down) to 1.0 (for a house that is in good-as-new,
freshly renovated condition). The resulting number would be deducted
from the house-and-land market price. The amount left over would be the
``land value'' on which the land value tax will be calculated.

Land value, for LVT taxation purposes, is then the difference between
the current market price of house-and-land less the replacement cost of
the buildings and improvements (e.g.~driveways) on the land, adjusted
for the depreciated value of the buildings (based on their condition).
Rather benignly, using this method for calculating LVT also encourages
people to maintain their houses in tip-top shape.

Indeed, the system outlined here can serve to encourage people to make
`green' energy efficiency improvements to their buildings as well. For
example, the multiplier applied to standard building replacement costs
could be specified to go above 1.0, for example 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, or
as high as 1.5, for a specified number of years (e.g.~10 years),
depending on whether the building owner has had specific and measurable
improvements made that improve energy efficiency, or lower the carbon
footprint of the property - for example, heat pumps, rooftop solar hot
water heaters, or improved insulation. The highest rating would be for
buildings that have achieved a ``Passivhaus'' standard.

However, there is a possible problem with this approach in the longer
run: There is a feedback loop between land value taxes and the market
price of real estate properties (land-and-houses). The higher land value
taxes go, the lower we can expect market prices of properties to go. At
the end of the day, if the government sets out to capture all the
`economic rent' from land (rather than letting land `owners' capture
it), the `freehold' price of a piece of property should decline until it
amounts to the combination of the value of the buildings, plus the
locational value of exclusive usufruct of that particular property even
in spite of the fact that in some places, high LVT tax means people who
`own land' are essentially paying rent to the government.

At that point, it might make more sense to allow or encourage people to
sell land back to the government (or to the central bank, which could
have land banking added to its duties), and have the government rent out
properties to occupiers directly, with the price of leasing a property
(for some specified time-frame) determined by competitive bidding. If
the leases are longer than a few years (five years?), however, this
becomes fraught, since circumstances will change and locational utility
will change. Black markets in on-leasing properties (an illegal
secondary market) could arise if very long-term leases exist.

Another way to determine how much economic rent is associated with a
given piece of property is the price of rent in the neighbourhood. The
rent per square meter of a flat differs depending on city and
neighbourhood. Why? Partly because of the details of the flat itself -
how luxurious its detailing is, how big the windows are, and so on. And
these differences can be characterised by setting up a standardised
catalogue of different quality levels of flat (derived in part by
estimating their replacement costs). But the main reason for differences
in rental prices per square meter are locational. A flat facing onto a
river and an otherwise identical flat facing a busy motorway will have
very different valuations. Because of this, it should be straightforward
to develop a schedule of the relative amount of economic rent generated
by different properties (and available to be captured, either by private
landlords, or by government through a land value tax).

The Mirrlees review noted that one difficulty is that in most areas and
sectors there are generally few transactions in land, separate from any
buildings thereon. That's why a valuation approach based on estimates of
building replacement cost adjusted by depreciation, as we propose here,
makes sense.

Mirrlees et al.~also noted that for Land Value Tax to be efficient (and
not discourage productive activity), it does not have to be very
accurate - however, inaccurate valuations could cause unfairness between
taxpayers. They explain:

\begin{quote}
\emph{``It is worth noting that since we are looking at taxing a rent,
the figure for land value does not have to be exact - or even
approximate - for the LVT to be efficient. The value of each plot of
land falls by the present value of the tax imposed on it; in principle,
each plot could be taxed at an arbitrarily different rate without
compromising the efficiency of the tax. However, to the extent that
valuations are not accurate, inequities will be created between
taxpayers - just as they can be created by inaccurate valuations under
the current property tax regime, but the inequities will be worse if the
valuation is less accurate.''}(Mirrlees et al.
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Mirrlees2011}{2011})
\end{quote}

The Mirrlees review also found that despite the `thinness of the
market,' there are recognized methods for determining land values where
there are a low number of transactions. For example, one obvious way is
to look at cases in which similar buildings, in different locations, are
on the market at very different prices. This brings us back to our
London versus Scunthorpe example, in which we can see that the same kind
of house on the same size plot of land sells for a lot more in London
than Scunthorpe. This tells us something about the difference between
land values in the two locations. Such comparative location data can
supplement (but not replace) the building-replacement-cost approach we
recommend.

A study by the Institute for Public Policy Research (IPPR) suggested
that another issue that must be overcome pertains to recording land
ownership. Approximately 30 percent of land in England and Wales is not
currently valued by the land registry, which makes it difficult to
ascertain its ownership and value. They note that countries such as
Denmark have found ways to record ownership information and assess land
value.

\begin{quote}
\emph{``These are not necessarily insurmountable problems, but it would
take a lot of detailed work to devise a robust and sustainable system of
land value taxation for the UK. Countries with a functioning land value
tax have dealt with some of these issues. For example, land in Denmark
is valued using a `hedonic' pricing model based on the compulsory
registration of all land transactions. This model uses information about
the characteristics of land (location, transport links and soon) that is
sold to estimate the value of other land''} (Lawton et al.
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Lawton2013a}{2013})
\end{quote}

\hypertarget{the-asset-rich---cash-poor-thedevon-pensioners}{%
\subsection{The Asset Rich - Cash Poor (The'Devon
Pensioners')}\label{the-asset-rich---cash-poor-thedevon-pensioners}}

One oft repeated concern with Land Value Tax is that there may be people
who are living in property which is of high value, but who have little
income, for example a pensioner who owns a home in central London. If
they had to pay a tax based on land values, critics argue, such people
might be forced to sell their homes, even though they had intended to
stay until life's end in their familiar surroundings. It should be noted
that this concern is vastly overblown when the likely number of `Devon
pensioners' is considered. Oxford University Professor Iain McLean
estimated that only about 2\% of the population are in this position.

He writes,

\begin{quote}
\emph{``\,`But what about the Devon pensioners?' I hear. There are
actually very few poor people living in rich houses - about 2\% of
households\ldots{}They should not distort the discussion of the best
property tax for the other 98\%.''} (Mclean
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Mclean2013}{2013})
\end{quote}

Moreover, he argues that `Devon pensioners' could easily be accommodated
by raising the asset threshold for Council tax benefit eligibility, and
allowing the tax liability to be deferred and become a charge on the
estate when the house is sold (Maxwell et al.
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Maxwell}{2005}).

\hypertarget{political-feasibility-issues}{%
\subsection{Political Feasibility
Issues}\label{political-feasibility-issues}}

`Stern's Law of Tax' suggests that taxes which are best economically are
the worst politically. Richard Brooks, research director at the Fabian
Society, has investigated whether Land Value Tax might be politically
infeasible. He writes, in an IPPR report,

\begin{quote}
\emph{``The philosophical and economic case for a land value tax (LVT)
seems strong, but the issue has all the hallmarks of a political
minefield: Large numbers of people would be affected by any change; the
status quo is seen to be unsatisfactory, but there is little consensus
about the appropriate response; and public understanding is low.''}
(Maxwell et al. \protect\hyperlink{ref-Maxwell}{2005})
\end{quote}

We could add that those who would most be affected by LVT are also those
who are wealthier and have the resources to lobby actively on their own
behalf. Notably, many politicians and media moguls are landowners and
would be affected by the introduction of LVT.

Brooks suggests some steps which could be taken to better `prepare the
ground' for an introduction of LVT:

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  Increase public understanding of Land Value Tax. This could occur
  through discussion of LVT within the context of related debates, for
  example debates around Council Tax.
\item
  Some impacts of LVT could be softened, even if this means losing some
  of the economic benefits. Brooks suggests that households might be
  protected from sharp increases in their tax liabilities.
\item
  Introduce LVT such that it yielded less revenue than Council Tax in
  total, resulting in less domestic losers overall. This could be paid
  for by increasing the total revenue from non-domestic property.
\end{itemize}

He also offers an test for proponents of LVT to assess the policy's
political feasibility:

\begin{quote}
\emph{``What is needed is a really clear understanding of what the
household impacts might look like by income group, household type, and
geographical area. This kind of work would allow the parameters of a
politically plausible scheme to be determined. There is no clear formula
for such a calculation, but very crudely, no scheme which appears to be
financially detrimental to significant numbers of swing voters in
marginal constituencies is politically plausible.''} (Maxwell et al.
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Maxwell}{2005})
\end{quote}

\hypertarget{the-denmark-experience}{%
\subsection{The Denmark Experience}\label{the-denmark-experience}}

Land Value Tax has been applied in some form in several countries,
including Denmark and Estonia, and some parts of Australia, New Zealand,
and the USA. (Conservative et al.
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Conservative2016}{2016}). The chart below
illustrates the widespread nature of land tax policies (Dye and England
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Dye2009}{2009}).

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}c@{}}
\toprule
\begin{minipage}[b]{0.97\columnwidth}\centering
\includegraphics{ChapterPictures/8-9-DenmarkLVT.png}\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.97\columnwidth}\centering
\emph{Figure 10.9 - Land Value Taxation: Theory Evidence and Practice -
Countries with Land Value Taxation by Year of Adoption}\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

Since 1922, Denmark has levied a land value tax based on the market
price of land, revalued every two years. The tax is payable to the local
authority and county based on a per-thousandth share of the value of the
land. The share varies according to different types of land use; however
each share is a minimum of six and a maximum of 24 thousandths of the
value of the land, giving an effective tax rate between 0.6\% and 2.4\%
of the land's estimated market value.

\begin{quote}
\emph{``Such a tax raises the cost of holding developable land when
demand, as expressed through rising market prices, increases. This
should, absent other factors, make holding valuable land more expensive
as development pressure increases, encouraging land release for
development.''} (Barker and Ekins
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Barker2004}{2004})
\end{quote}

This localised Land Value Tax is still in effect in Denmark today.
Denmark initiated another, more centralised, land value tax in 1957,
under what was known as the Ground Duty Government. It gained this name
because at its inauguration, the government announced that it would
collect as much rent or `Ground Duty' as possible. From 1957 to 1960,
under their governance, the Danish economy improved dramatically.

\begin{quote}
``*During the Ground Duty Government (1957-1960) industrial production
went up - it more than doubled; private investments were three times
bigger than public investment; employees and entrepreneurs earned higher
real income than ever before; inflation disappeared almost; savings
soared immensely; unemployment almost disappeared to around 1 percent;
foreign debt was reduced considerably; domestic and foreign trade
expanded, and at the end of the period (1960), all economic forecasters
expected further economic progress and prosperity.``*
\end{quote}

\begin{quote}
\emph{``How much of the progress was due to the formation and activities
of the Ground Duty Government is difficult to estimate exactly, as other
countries experienced economic progress in the same period; but in
Denmark the progress was eminent.''} (Lefmann
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Lefmann2007}{2007})
\end{quote}

The Ground Duty government were defeated in 1960. According to writer
Ole Lefmann,

\begin{quote}
``\emph{Economic analysts who examined the defeat of the Ground Duty
Government have all emphasized that the reason for the defeat was
political and succeeded because Danish proponents of Land Value Taxation
had not enlightened people in general well enough about the advantages
of their proposal.}''
\end{quote}

According to Danish MP Knud Tholstrup, after the Ground Duty Government
defeat, inflation climbed back up to 5\% and by 1964 reached 8\%. Land
prices increased dramatically, increasing 19-fold from 1960 to 1981,
while prices of goods and services increased fourfold (Bauwens
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Bauwens2011}{2011}).

Denmark's experience could be seen as a lesson to proponents of Land
Value Tax, or in fact any tax: It's not enough that the tax makes
economic sense, is of benefit to the majority, and is `just.' Public
perception matters too. The public need to understand why it is of good
in all these ways, otherwise they will be susceptible to noisy
fearmongering and lobbying from powerful vested interests.

In the final chapter of this part we investigate in more depth the
unique nature of land, how it differs from other factors of production
and the implications of this for the economy.

\hypertarget{positive-externalities-in-land-use}{%
\section{10.9: Positive Externalities in Land
Use}\label{positive-externalities-in-land-use}}

Markets allocate land to the highest bidder, which suggests that land
ownership will go to where its \emph{private} use value is greatest.
Whoever can generate the highest revenue from using the land will be
willing to make the highest bid. However, little to no attention is paid
to the social use of such a space. Rypkema (Rypkema
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Rypkema1992a}{1992}) argues that for any
commodity to have economic value, it must possess the following four
characteristics: `scarcity, purchasing power, desire, and utility.' Much
in the same way that a property value can be increased by the positive
externalities flowing from an external investment, like a new transport
link or better amenities, so too can the value in a community be
increased by a positive use of the land space. The positive value that
arises from land stems from the amenities that it provides to the
surrounding community, whether that be in beautification, economic and
commercial terms, or in facility-provision (like a useful village shop,
or an open-access bathroom in a busy high street).

One example of a positive externality could be the conservation of
beautiful historical buildings. Tiesdell (Tiesdell
\protect\hyperlink{ref-tiesdell1996}{1996}) says that:

\begin{quote}
``\emph{Historic buildings are often more interesting than the new,
`industrial' buildings, housing and shopping centers.}''
\end{quote}

Romero argued that such preservation helps people maintain a sense of
the past, providing an `anchor to the past, as well as an incentive to
the future' (Romero \protect\hyperlink{ref-romero2004}{2004}). This
argument hinges on the idea that historic buildings can provide
functional diversity, resource value, economic and commercial value to
the surrounding community. However, maintaining such buildings can often
present a great cost for a private owner, to such an extent that they
may deem it more financially prudent not to maintain their public
amenities - be that, as per this example, tearing down a historic
building, or perhaps closing the public bathroom that their property had
previously maintained.

Governments can intervene to help promote this social value above the
private value, either through command and control (e.g.~mandating all
buildings be the same height so as to control aesthetics) or taxes and
subsidies (taxing disused land and subsidising home improvements through
rebates). Issues exist with both policy methods. Such direct orders may
appear draconian and totalitarian, and may also not be administered
properly so as to ensure the desired characteristics of the land are
maintained. Taxes and subsidies may not always be set at an appropriate
level to properly manage the resource, but they do at least give
individuals flexibility in what they choose to do with their property.

\hypertarget{in-more-depth-the-unique-case-of-land}{%
\section{10.10: In More Depth: The Unique Case of
Land}\label{in-more-depth-the-unique-case-of-land}}

\begin{quote}
\emph{Ask for what end the heav'nly bodies shine, Earth for whose use?
Pride answers, Tis for mine.} Alexander Pope
\end{quote}

\begin{quote}
\emph{``This land is your land, this land is my land From California to
the New York island From the Redwood forest to the Gulf Stream waters
This land was made for you and me.''} - Woody Guthrie
\end{quote}

\begin{quote}
``\emph{When the Great Way prevailed, natural resources were fully used
for the benefit of all and not appropriated for selfish ends\ldots{}
This was the Age of the Great Commonwealth of peace and prosperity}.''
Confucius
\end{quote}

We humans encounter land; we do not make it. It is part of the
primordial form which precedes human existence. It has been formed over
millions of years, by forces we only partially understand. We observe
it, we walk over it, we change it, but we cannot create or destroy it.
No human is responsible for the existence of land (or air, or water, or
life, or ourselves), but we all benefit from it. More than merely
benefitting, we rely on land in the very strongest and most fundamental
way, to exist and to survive.

Land generates good things for us `for free' through mind-bendingly
complex processes that seem deceptively simple. These processes arose as
a consequence of the billions of years of evolution in a biosphere rife
with vast numbers of feedbacks. A seed in the ground can produce a tree
without any human involvement. The tree may produce flowers or fruit,
and seeds for more trees. We can plant trees, of course, and planting a
tree seems a simple action, but it is merely one minor step of
intervention in a natural biogenetic technology of awesome
sophistication. On this planet and on none other that we know of - and
certainly none other in our solar system - land holds the power to make
things grow. We may harness these forces, guide them in ways useful to
us with agricultural practices, but we do not create them. Anyone who
controls land is, by legal convention, given control over the unfolding
of this power on that specific piece of land, a power Christians have
called `God's Bounty' and governments call `natural resources.' Whatever
the name, land in this sense belongs to no-one or to everyone - and we
suggest that land `ownership' entails a duty of respectful stewardship.

American Economist Mason Gaffney describes land as our `free gift':

\begin{quote}
\emph{``Land is not produced, it was created. It is the world, the
planet from which man evolved, with the sun that energizes it and the
orbit that tempers it. Land is a free gift, variously expressed in
different philosophies as Spaceship Earth, the Big Blue Marble, God's
Gift, Creation, Gaia, The Promised Land, or Nature. Mankind did not
create the Earth with its space and resources, nor can we add to them.
We can only acquire them, often by fighting, or rent-seeking, or in
other counterproductive ways. Man at best improves and develops
capacities inherent in the free gift.''} (Gaffney
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Gaffney2009}{2009})
\end{quote}

The notion of land as a gift applies even when land is developed and
urbanised. Any piece of land in a city will be affected by its
surrounds, but primarily the effects will be positive in terms of social
and economic value, because where people gather in high-density groups,
interesting things tend to happen. We can see that if the value of the
land were publicly owned, as perhaps it should be, then this form of
`free lunch' would be available to all.

Gaffney has spent his career critiquing the inadequate treatment of land
in economics. This chapter largely summarises his essay, ``Land as a
Distinctive Factor of Production,'' which is highly recommended
reading.(Gaffney \protect\hyperlink{ref-Gaffney2009}{2009})

\hypertarget{the-classical-factors-of-production}{%
\subsection{The Classical Factors of
Production}\label{the-classical-factors-of-production}}

Classical economic thought treated land as one of three `factors of
production.' These are resources or `inputs' which are used to produce
products and services (output). They are mutually exclusive,
comprehensive, and necessary for all kinds of economic activity. The
three inputs of classical economics were Labour, Capital, and Land. Each
factor has a price. The price of labour is wages; the price of capital
is interest; and the price of land is rent. Labour is familiar enough:
Human time spent working. Capital is ``that part of wealth devoted to
production.''

\footnote{George's precise definition was ``\textbf{wealth in the course
  of exchange}'' which requires a little more explanation. Here is the
  whole passage: ``The key, it seems to me, is whether or not the item
  is in the possession of the consumer. Wealth yet to be exchanged is
  capital. Wealth in the hands of the consumer is not. Hence, we can
  define capital as \textbf{wealth in the course of exchange}. We must
  understand here that exchange does not mean merely passing from hand
  to hand ' it also includes the increase in wealth from the
  reproductive or transformative forces of nature.Using this definition,
  we can include all the things that capital properly includes, and
  eliminate all it does not.}

This definition includes all tools. Tools are really capital, in
economic terms. For what makes a tool `capital' is whether the output of
its uses or services are to be exchanged or not. Thus, a lathe used to
make things for exchange is capital; a lathe kept as a hobby is not
capital. Wealth used in the construction of a railroad, a theater, or a
hotel is wealth in the course of exchange. The exchange does not occur
all at once, but little by little, with an indefinite number of people -
yet there is an exchange. The consumers are not the owners, but rather
the patrons who use these facilities.

This definition is consistent with the idea that \emph{capital is that
part of wealth devoted to production of more wealth.} But to say that
production is merely about `making things' is too narrow an
understanding of the term. Production also includes bringing things to
the consumer. Storekeepers are as much `producers' as farmers or
manufacturers. The stock in a store is capital, and it is as much
devoted to production as the capital of the others.

\hypertarget{land-in-economic-theory}{%
\subsection{Land in Economic Theory}\label{land-in-economic-theory}}

Gaffney (Gaffney \protect\hyperlink{ref-Gaffney2009}{2009}) defines
`economic land' as ``all natural resources and agents, with their sites
(locations and extensions in space),'' and emphasises that economic land
is not simply that which we would colloquially call `land.' Economic
land also includes air, falling water, water and seabeds or lakebeds
under it, game, fish, vegetation, and the radio spectrum. In modern
parlance: Natural resources.

For John Stuart Mill,

\begin{quote}
\emph{``The part which nature has in any work of man is indefinite and
incommensurable.''} (Mill
\protect\hyperlink{ref-mill1848principles}{1848})
\end{quote}

Thus land (or natural resources) was recognised by classical economists
as being distinct from, and on equal footing with, capital and labour.

However, according to Financial Times economic commentator Martin Wolf,
``something strange'' happened in the transition from Classical to
Neoclassical economic thought.

\begin{quote}
\emph{``In moving from classical to neoclassical economics - the
dominant academic school today - economists expunged land - or natural
resources. Neoclassical value theory\ldots{}still makes a great deal of
sense. Expunging natural resources from the way economists think about
the world does not.''}
\end{quote}

Neoclassical economic orthodoxy tends to conflate land (including
natural resources) with capital. The neoclassical theorists recognise
only two factors of production - labour and capital. For Wolf and a
growing number of economists, this change is based on erroneous
assumptions, the consequences of which are now having disastrous
effects:

*``The idea that land and capital are the same thing is evidently
ludicrous. It requires us to believe that the economic machine is
self-sustaining - a sort of perpetual motion machine. Capital is the
product of savings and investment. It is the result of human frugality
and the invention required to imagine and create new capital goods.
Labour is also - and in today's circumstances, increasingly - a form of
capital. Parents, governments and individual people invest in their own
skills, so making themselves more productive.*

*Yet there would be no economy - indeed no humanity - without a constant
inflow of natural resources into the system: What lies above our heads
(the sun and the atmosphere), what lies close to us (the soil, the seas
and location itself), and what lies beneath us (fossil fuels, metals and
minerals and heat). Humanity does not make these things; it exploits
them. Some of these resources are also appropriable and so a source of
unearned personal wealth.``* (Wolf
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Wolf2010}{2010})

\hypertarget{the-effects-of-treating-land-as-a-kind-of-capital}{%
\subsection{The effects of treating land as a kind of
capital}\label{the-effects-of-treating-land-as-a-kind-of-capital}}

According to writer Martin Adams, this failure to effectively
distinguish between land and capital in economic models leads to
``incorrect forecasts and faulty economic applications in addressing
social issues such as wealth inequality or ecocide.''(Adams
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Adams2016}{2016}) This occurs partly because by
seeing land as capital, we fail to recognise that \emph{the factors
which influence the price (land rents) of land are not the same factors
which influence the price (interest rates) of capital.}

This erroneous conflation of land with capital also leads to the
treatment of land as an investible product, though it is not. Because
land generally increases in value, people talk about buying land `as an
investment.' The buy-to-let landlords in the UK who see themselves as
investors in property, are not truly investing in the economic sense.
Rather, they are parking their money somewhere - thez are making a
\emph{`placement,'} not an investment. This is the case because to be an
\emph{investment,} by definition, something which is both new and of
value must be created - something that did not previously already exist.
Land is not investible in the sense that anything new of value is
created by the input of money. Acquiring land involves a mere transfer
of ownership - not a creation of new value.

When money is put into start-up businesses producing food, shelving,
toys, medical devices, or ultracapacitors, for example, these are
productive investments. They may, in tandem with the efforts of people
labouring in these businesses, create something new which is of value.
The mere purchase of land in the hope that its value will go up later as
a city gets generally more expensive, by contrast, is not a productive
investment, as it adds no new goods or services of value to the economy.
Neo-classical economic theory fails to recognise this important
distinction. The results of this are policies which allow or encourage
people to park their money in property rather than incentivising them to
invest it in truly productive endeaviours, such as factories or new
infrastructure. This misallocation of finances leads to less creation of
new products and services than would be the case if money were invested,
rather than merely `placed.'

\hypertarget{ways-in-which-land-differs-from-capital}{%
\section{10.11 Ways in which land differs from
capital}\label{ways-in-which-land-differs-from-capital}}

Land has unique characteristics which distinguish it from capital as an
economic input. Gaffney emphasises ten primary distinctions:

\hypertarget{land-is-not-produced-nor-is-it-reproducible}{%
\subsection{1. Land is not produced, nor is it
reproducible}\label{land-is-not-produced-nor-is-it-reproducible}}

When satellites show us pictures of the earth from space, they show us
something which we did not create, yet exists: Lands and seas. ``Man at
best improves and develops capacities inherent in the free gift.''

Capital, on the other hand, is produced by human investment, thrift and
production.(Gaffney \protect\hyperlink{ref-Gaffney1994}{1994}) It
coexists with land, and perhaps this is why microeconomics makes the
error of conflating land and capital. Gaffney suggests that neoclassical
economics deals mainly with relations of coexistence and largely ignores
relations of sequence over time, such as the formation and destruction
of capital.

\emph{``The life of capital, like that of people, is marked by major
sacraments of birth, growth, aging, and death - all missing from
microeconomic theory. Micro deals mainly with how existing resources are
allocated at a moment in time, not how they originate, grow, flourish,
reproduce, age, die, and decompose.''}

\hypertarget{land-as-site-is-permanent-and-recyclable}{%
\subsection{2. Land as `site' is permanent and
recyclable}\label{land-as-site-is-permanent-and-recyclable}}

Essentially, this is to say that land does not get used up (with the
exception of extractive natural resources), destroyed, or depreciate.
Capital does decay, however. Capital products - human-created tools, in
the broad sense - wear out. They must be kept usable by constant
maintenance and repair. It is, of course, possible to damage land, for
instance through toxic waste dumping.

\hypertarget{land-supply-is-fixed}{%
\subsection{3. Land supply is fixed}\label{land-supply-is-fixed}}

One of the most crucial consequences of this fact is that, unlike
capital, land acquisition is a zero-sum game. That is, no one can
acquire more land without others having less. The amount of land we have
now is fixed. We cannot make more (even attempts to create new land
masses involve simply moving land around, e.g.~from underwater to the
surface).

\hypertarget{land-is-immobile-in-space-and-uncontrollable-in-time}{%
\subsection{4. Land is immobile in space and uncontrollable in
time}\label{land-is-immobile-in-space-and-uncontrollable-in-time}}

The fact that land is immobile in space means that its supply cannot be
increased to meet increased demand in a localised area. So when demand
goes up, prices go up.

The fact that land is `uncontrollable in time' means that the benefits
which flow from land, such as raising seedlings, flow steadily at a
certain pace. The benefits cannot be set aside and stored for future
use.

\begin{quote}
\emph{``Nature's services per se\ldots{}come in a flow like time itself,
unbidden and uncontrollable. Mankind cannot advance nor retard its
services at will.''}(Gaffney \protect\hyperlink{ref-Gaffney1994}{1994})
\end{quote}

Another effect of the immobile or fixed location of land is that is
suffers externalities - both positive and negative - from activities on
surrounding land. That is, the economic value of a piece of land is
affected directly by what is going on by the land surrounding it. So for
example, land's economic value can be affected by negative externalities
such as pollution or crime in the surrounding area. The value of land
can also be increased by `positive externalities,' such as improvements
to local infrastructure and the creation of public amenities.

\hypertarget{land-does-not-turn-over.-it-is-recycled-and-versatile}{%
\subsection{5. Land does not turn over. It is recycled and
versatile}\label{land-does-not-turn-over.-it-is-recycled-and-versatile}}

Land is versatile in that it is available for a multiplicity of uses.
Land rarely becomes obsolete, with the result that there is almost
always an opportunity cost in the use of land: i.e.~it can always be
used for something else. This is not the case for many forms of capital,
which can and do become obsolete as technologies evolve.

\emph{``The only source of land for new uses today, as for ages past, is
to take it from its previous use.''}

\hypertarget{land-is-not-interchangeable-with-capital}{%
\subsection{6. Land is not interchangeable with
capital}\label{land-is-not-interchangeable-with-capital}}

Interchange must be distinguished from `exchange.' Land can be exchanged
for capital, but they are not interchangeable. Capital can be converted
into other types of capital. The consequence is that it's a mistake to
think that `uniformity' within taxation should occur between land and
capital. It need only occur within each class.

\hypertarget{land-is-subject-to-market-forces-that-differ-from-those-that-determine-the-price-of-capital-interest-rates.}{%
\subsection{7. Land is subject to market forces that differ from those
that determine the price of capital (interest
rates).}\label{land-is-subject-to-market-forces-that-differ-from-those-that-determine-the-price-of-capital-interest-rates.}}

We mentioned earlier the costs or prices of different modes of
production. The price of labour is wages, the price of capital is
interest, and the price of land is land rent. But what affects these
various prices, and are the influencing factors the same? The short
answer is that they are not the same. Interest rates around the world
are subject to common, interconnecting forces, and they rise and fall in
sympathy. Land rents are also influenced by common forces, but these are
not the same forces as those which influence interest rates. In fact,
one of the forces which influences land rents is the interest rate. The
two prices vary inversely. As Gaffney states,

\emph{``Capital and Land are rivals for the same pie, so usually their
returns vary inversely. Ground rent equals operating cash flow less
interest on the cost of building, and less building depreciation. A rise
in interest rates lowers ground rents.''}

The melding of land and capital in neoclassical thought causes us to
lose sight of this distinction and the attendant inverse relationship.
This is an obstacle to attempts to model the outcome of economic
policies.

\hypertarget{land-price-guides-investors-and-determines-the-character-of-capital-as-capital-substitutes-for-land.}{%
\subsection{8. Land price guides investors and determines the character
of capital, as capital substitutes for
land.}\label{land-price-guides-investors-and-determines-the-character-of-capital-as-capital-substitutes-for-land.}}

There is a relationship between land prices (rents) and the kinds of
capital which investors choose to invest in. We are familiar with the
idea that when the price of labour is high, then investors prefer
`labour-saving' capital (such as self-service checkouts at
supermarkets). Similarly, when land rents are high, investors prefer
`land-saving' capital, such as high buildings.

They also favour:

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  land-enhancing capital (capital used to improve land for a new use)
\item
  land-linking capital (rail lines, canals, etc.)
\item
  land-capturing capital (e.g.~dams to secure water rights)
\item
  rent-leading capital
\end{itemize}

\hypertarget{land-is-limitational}{%
\subsection{9. Land is limitational}\label{land-is-limitational}}

This is a technical term which essentially means that all human activity
requires some land (including air, space, water, living ecosystems,
etc.) and some capital. Labour and capital cannot exist without at least
some land, while land can easily exist without labour or capital. Absent
human labour or capital, Land supports natural ecosystems, which can be
understood as the economies of our cousins in the tree of life -
grasslands, forests, lakes, rivers, seas, wildlife habitat.

It has often fallen to environmentalists to remind us of the
limitational value of land. The famous environmentalist catch-cry coined
by activist Judy Bonds puts it most powerfully: ``No jobs on a dead
planet!''

\hypertarget{land-value-basic-permanent-location-value-is-not-an-economic-fund}{%
\subsection{10. Land value (basic permanent location value) is not an
economic
fund}\label{land-value-basic-permanent-location-value-is-not-an-economic-fund}}

The unique qualities of land certainly give it value, but this value
cannot be effectively described by the usual categories which are used
to describe economic values. These standard categories divide value into
funds and flows. Gaffney clarifies that land value is the present value
of anticipated future service flows from land, which cannot be hastened.
This is a mouthful, but it expresses an important quality of land. This
kind of value is not like capital stores (a fund), which can be drawn
from, such as grain from a granary.

Here we are speaking about the basic permanent location value of land.
There are exceptions in cases of exhaustible resources such as oil and
gas reserves.

\hypertarget{economic-consequences}{%
\section{10.12 Economic Consequences}\label{economic-consequences}}

\hypertarget{the-origin-of-property-in-land-is-political-and-owning-land-imparts-superior-bargaining-power.}{%
\subsection{1. The origin of property in land is political, and owning
land imparts superior bargaining
power.}\label{the-origin-of-property-in-land-is-political-and-owning-land-imparts-superior-bargaining-power.}}

Capital may result from the ingenuity and effort of people and involves
the creation of something new. There is thus a sort of natural ownership
which arises. There is also a natural ownership of one's labour. There
is, in contrast, no such natural ownership of land. That is, no-one
claims land by right of production. Whilst there are good reasons for
private ownership of land, it should be remembered that historically,
\emph{the origin and distribution of property in land in not natural -
it is political.}

\begin{quote}
\emph{``The initial distribution of land - the origin of property in
land - is military, legal, and political, not economic. The prime
business of nations throughout history has been to gain and defend land.
What was won by force has no higher sanction than lex fortiores, and
must be kept and defended by force.''} (Gaffney
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Gaffney1994}{1994})
\end{quote}

The enlightenment era thinker and member of the Physiocrats, Richard
Cantillon, similarly wrote:

\begin{quote}
\emph{``It does not appear that Providence has given the right of the
possession of land to one man preferably to another: the most ancient
titles are founded on violence and conquest.''}
\end{quote}

This original distribution of land ownership often persists long-term,
transmitted through inheritance, and confers political power for
generations. This is particularly relevant in regards to fairness.

For the American context, Gaffney puts it thus:

\begin{quote}
*``If one's grandfather was a slave when the Land Office was parcelling
out Federal lands to the friends and cousins of corrupt Congressmen, one
may be excused from believing Utopia will ensue from limiting all future
changes to''win-win" Pareto-optimal changes from the inherited status
quo.``*
\end{quote}

Similar reservations might be held by the descendants of peasants in
England, who lost access to the common land after the Enclosure Acts.
Writer Helen Salmon has explained the vicious unfairness of the
Enclosure Acts:

\begin{quote}
*``Predictably, the commissioners, appointed by the rich landowners,
gave them the best land, often leaving the poor with useless, infertile
plots. Plots were also often allocated to the owners of cottages rather
than their tenants, leaving the poor with nothing and their landlords
with yet more land.*
\end{quote}

\begin{quote}
\emph{If this were not bad enough, the costs of enclosure, including the
costs of presenting the bill to parliament and fencing all the plots of
land \ldots{} would be shared between all the villagers. These costs
were ruinous for the poor, who were forced to sell their land to the
rich at whatever price was offered.} (Salmon
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Salmon2005}{2005})
\end{quote}

The benefits of ownership of land multiply further, because owning land
imparts superior bargaining power. Whilst we all have labour power in
varying degrees, landowners also receive income from land above that,
which gives them discretionary spending or waiting power. And whilst
land appreciates in value, capital depreciates. So in contests between
the landowner and people who do not own land, the landowner has a key
bargaining advantage.

\hypertarget{land-rent-does-not-evoke-thrift-production-or-investment.}{%
\subsection{2. Land rent does not evoke thrift, production, or
investment.}\label{land-rent-does-not-evoke-thrift-production-or-investment.}}

We noted earlier that `investing' in land is not in itself an act of
productive investment. Gaffney puts it thus:

\emph{``Investing in land is macroeconomically sterile. It creates
neither income nor capital. Socially, it is a wash: one buys, the other
sells, nothing else happens.''}

As we've noted, a term for this type of non-productive investment is
`placement.' A placement is a non-generative, passive place to put your
money. When people owning placements see their value increase, they gain
that increase in private worth without a corresponding increase in
overall societal wealth. This means, in proportional terms, a decrease
in social wealth, because it involves a zero-sum game.

Since property and land are tangible assets with a fairly stable and
easily-assessed value, they are highly attractive to banks as collateral
for financial investment. The same is not generally true for capital,
which is seen as much higher risk and less easily valuated. Treating
land as an investment diverts the attention and lending activities of
banks away from what should be their more important role of funding
productive investment in society.

\hypertarget{land-value-lowers-savings-rates}{%
\subsection{3. Land value lowers savings
rates}\label{land-value-lowers-savings-rates}}

Rising land values in investment portfolios lower the pressure to create
real capital in order to generate financial returns. This reduces
investment in the supply of capital. Gaffney compares this situation
with the case of slave ownership in the past:

\emph{``The existence of high land rents and values, like the ownership
of slaves, tends to satisfy the need for accumulation of assets without
any actual capital formation.''}

\hypertarget{land-destabilises-the-financial-system}{%
\subsection{4. Land destabilises the financial
system}\label{land-destabilises-the-financial-system}}

Two of the most serious recent economic crises have been associated with
land and property speculation: the Japanese crisis of 1990 and the
following lost decades, and the great financial crisis of 2007-8 and the
consequent `great recession' (which continues in Europe as a period of
prolonged, low-economic-growth stagnation). Both of these economic
problems were triggered by property lending bubbles which caused huge
losses on bank loans when they burst. These losses rippled through the
financial system, causing banks to become insolvent. Banks reduced their
lending activity, causing a reduction in economic activity. The
government stepped in both to recapitalize banks and also to stimulate
the economy through low interest rates and fiscal deficits. These
actions prevented an economic catastrophe, but led to a ballooning of
government debt.

What was wrong with the system and its underlying economic model? In the
UK, the banking system - the generation of the £ money supply - has been
based primarily on mortgage debt and house price speculation. Banks have
lent almost exclusively on existing collateral, primarily property (real
estate), rather than performing the main economic role originally
intended for them, which is to finance new business investment.

High and volatile house prices create various macroeconomic imbalances.
Whilst house prices are increasing, the `wealth effect' makes people
feel richer and able to fund higher consumption, which increases
indebtedness. However, when the bubble bursts and house prices fall,
individuals feel overburdened by debt and cut back on expenditure,
leading to a demand deficiency. This is when the government needs to
step in to make up for the lack in private sector demand. If the
government opts for `austerity' instead, the result is stagnation or
recession and high unemployment, due to weakness in aggregate demand.

Land and property speculation is not economically productive. It also
contributes to increased inequality, which itself has economic
consequences. Lending and capital which has been allocated to house
price speculation could instead have been used to support productive
business and capital investment.

\hypertarget{the-price-of-land-must-be-systemically-risky-to-compensate-for-supernormal-returns}{%
\subsection{5. The price of land must be systemically risky to
compensate for supernormal
returns}\label{the-price-of-land-must-be-systemically-risky-to-compensate-for-supernormal-returns}}

If, as we argue, urban land has a supernormal `monopoly' return
potentially greater than that of other assets, then this presents us
with a problem. If rational agents can deduce this, then we'd expect
them to pile into this asset class, leading to a rapid appreciation to
high levels from which it would no longer be expected to achieve a super
return. This is, in fact, exactly what we observe. Land observes
semi-regular booms (or `bubbles') and busts. This instability has very
significant economic effects - the Japanese crash of 1990 and the US
sub-prime crisis that began in 2006 both had their roots in real estate
bubbles.

\hypertarget{a-fall-in-interest-rates-makes-property-owners-richer-and-makes-own-use-home-ownership-too-expensive-for-millions}{%
\subsection{6. A fall in interest rates makes property owners richer and
makes own-use home ownership too expensive for
millions}\label{a-fall-in-interest-rates-makes-property-owners-richer-and-makes-own-use-home-ownership-too-expensive-for-millions}}

Changes in interest rates change the capitalisation rate between a
rental flow and the associated capitalised value of a piece of land.
Changes in mortgage rates affect the cost of purchase, since they change
the total quantity of interest paid to the bank.

Generally, since the 1980s, interest rates have been falling, leading to
very large capital gains on land and property assets. Marx argued that
the capitalist system, in the course of accumulating capital, would lead
to long-term reductions in the rate of return on capital. If these are
accommodated by the central bank, this would lead to long-term
reductions in the interest rate, leading to capital value appreciation.

As we can see from this discussion, the ownership of land confers a
great deal of power to owners. Limited land supply means that the owner
is able to benefit from the need for housing (rent), from increases in
demand for housing in the area (rent increases), and from decreases in
interest rate (asset value increases). These increases in property
wealth contribute to the impact outlined by Piketty (Piketty
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Piketty2014a}{2014}), whereby the rate of
increase in wealth derived from asset ownership outstrips that of wealth
derived from saving a portion of wage income, which further compounds
inequality between the have-nots and the have-lots.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}c@{}}
\toprule
\includegraphics{OtherPictures/WealthRentIncreases1.png}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\emph{Figure 6.20 Land, Rent, and Income Inequality}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

\hypertarget{the-treatment-of-land-in-economics-education}{%
\section{10.12 The Treatment of Land in Economics
Education}\label{the-treatment-of-land-in-economics-education}}

We have discussed the problems which the treatment of land in
neo-liberal economic theory has caused. To solve these problems, we need
to bring land out of the shadows of economic theory.

According to Gaffney, the original conflation of land with capital may
have occurred in part for political reasons, to deflect possible taxes
on land. This unfortunate development in economic thought was then
institutionalised: Land was ignored in the main economic canon in
universities, and was marginalised into sub-disciplines of `Land
Economics' and `Agricultural Economics.'

Gaffney's scathing observation:

\begin{quote}
*``(T)he obvious is obscured, silenced, or denied. Hundreds of books on
economic theory are published with `land' absent from the index. Denial
is reinforced by dominant figures using sophistical, pedantic cant,
which students learn to ape to distinguish themselves from the laity and
advance their careers.*
\end{quote}

\begin{quote}
*A number of economists don't buy it, but don't do anything about it -
acquiescing in error by silence, indifference, passivity, or anxiety of
the professional consequences. They handle the question by `going into
denial,' as it were, resolving a vexing issue by pretending it isn't
there. Truth will not be made manifest by hedging, especially against
such motivated forces as have an interest in hiding unearned wealth
behind the skirts of capital\ldots{} The discipline has not totally
eliminated land, but marginalized it. {[}\ldots{}{]} The sub-disciplines
are kept away from the `core' and `mainstream' of economic thinking by
compartmentalization and colonization. Patronizing `land economics' as a
colonial discipline keeps potentially contagious movements within the
empire, where they can absorb critical tendencies under watchful
control, while yet remaining safely remote, in the outskirts of the
system. Orthodoxy flows out from the core, communicated via mandatory
`core courses.' Land economics is banished from the commanding heights
of economics.``* (Gaffney \protect\hyperlink{ref-Gaffney1994}{1994})
\end{quote}

There may be additional reasons why land has been so neglected in
mainstream economics. One reason may be that land is often thought of in
agricultural terms, and is therefore assumed to play a small role in
modern industrial economies. However, though we may think of land as
rolling green hills and farmland, it must be stressed that `land' in
economics includes urban land. In fact, urban land is possibly more
significant to the economies of modern industrial societies than is
agricultural land. Another possible reason for the neglect of land in
neoclassical economics is that economics in general is focused on
production, not on the cost of existing assets. The classical economists
perhaps would not have considered the provision of housing services to
be part of `production.'

A further possibility is that a focus on land economics, and by
extension any discussion of taxing land, is politically unpalatable to
many. Landowning interests are politically highly influential. Even
universities may feel threatened by land economics, as they often hold
much of their wealth in the form of land.

Clearly, land must be brought out of the economic theory wilderness and
given a central role.

\hypertarget{case-study-singapore-as-a-property-state}{%
\section{10.13 CASE STUDY: Singapore as a 'Property
State}\label{case-study-singapore-as-a-property-state}}

Singapore is often described as a neoliberal paradise: Low taxes, open
trade, a large financial sector. It has been phenomenally successful,
with average growth rates in the range of 5-10\%, and has transformed
itself into a city-state with amongst the highest GDP in the world.

Scratch the surface, and a rather different story arises, one that has
public ownership of land and provision of public housing at its heart,
as described by Anne Haila's
\href{https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/book/10.1002/9781118827611}{`Urban
Land Rent, Singapore as a Property State'}. So what exactly is the
`Singapore model' in relation to property?

Ownership of land really has two components: It allows the landlord to
collect rent from whoever is occupying the property, and it gives
control over the development of that land, including the effects of
development on the physical environment, on other people and landowners,
and on the supply of housing. Singapore has both components under public
control. Its system includes public capture of rent and public
development of housing.

The first component, capturing land rent for public purposes, is in tune
with the ideas of advocates for a land value tax (LVT). Proponents of an
LVT argue for taxing land value (principally urban land, as agricultural
land is of much lower value). An LVT separates the value of a property
into two components: the value of the physical building (the bricks and
mortar) and that of the underlying location (land value). As we've
noted, many of the world's most famous economists, from Adam Smith and
David Ricardo to Milton Friedman and Britain's Mirrlees Review of
taxation have argued in favour of an LVT, and American journalist Henry
George popularised these ideas with his masterpiece \emph{Progress and
Poverty}. Recently the Economist
\href{https://www.economist.com/briefing/2018/08/09/the-time-may-be-right-for-land-value-taxes}{has
promoted the idea}. In Singapore, public ownership of land allows the
charging of ground rent, but this idea is implemented sensitively, with
a view to reducing the cost of housing to low-paid workers.

Singapore has also shown the advantages of the second component: The
public sector having a decisive role in developing land. Providing
public housing is of course crucial in a rapidly-developing high=wage
city with limited space. Furthermore, the state development of
infrastructure increases those very same land values. The public sector
housing fund achieves a positive net income, and a replenishment of its
funds, which can be used to provide further investment, in a beneficial
cycle. Contrast this to Britain, where public infrastructure such as the
HS2 high-speed rail line is paid from public funds, whereas the
landowners near the stations, who benefit thanks to increased land
values, pay nothing.

The whole tenor of the Singapore approach is pragmatic, putting the
public interest first, being sensitive to the interests of individuals,
and avoiding concentration of power in any one institution.

Whilst the institutions of the Singapore property state model have
evolved over decades, there are policy solutions that could give the
benefits of land value tax and of public ownership of land more
directly. In the UK, an LVT would replace council tax, business rates,
and stamp duty. It would be a proportional tax on the value of property
paid by owners rather than occupiers, with a deduction for the value of
the bricks and mortar. And future \emph{increases} in land rent could be
taxed at nearly 100\% and the revenues shared between those responsible:
The local community, municipal authority, and national government. Those
with large mortgages would be protected by asking banks to pay the land
value tax on the proportion covered by a mortgage. Alternatives to bank
mortgages, such as building societies and state-backed community land
purchases, could also be developed.

Singapore shows that public land ownership can be combined with high
rates of owner occupation. Low cost and high-quality public housing can
be both affordable and beneficial to all parts of the community,
including the business sector. Given the realities of Brexit Britain,
where parts of the public sector, such as Railtrack, are still selling
off land to the private sector, where public housing provision has
declined relative to the private sector, and where property taxation is
outdated and arbitrary, the Singapore property state model deserves a
closer look by British policy-makers.

\hypertarget{taxes-on-land-and-property-not-yet-edited}{%
\section{10.14 Taxes on Land and Property \^{}\^{} NOT YET
EDITED}\label{taxes-on-land-and-property-not-yet-edited}}

Because land is fixed in supply, it can be taxed without causing
significant economic distortion. A land tax subtracts the value of the
premises from the tax on the land itself. It can be imposed
progressively, reducing the return to landownership (capital gain plus
rent) to around a zero nominal return.

The implementation of land value captitr can be achieved in two main
ways. Firstly, a simple tax on land values and secondly, the public
ownership of land combined with short-term lease sales. The successful
city states of East Asia: Hong Kong and Singapore, adopt one or both of
these two options. Hong Kong, due to the new territories being
originally leased from China to Britain, never had private land
ownership simply because the land was to be returned to China
eventually. So the government of Hong Kong receives a large part of its
revenue in the sale of leases of 20 or 30 years term.

This tax is best introduced in 3 separate ways:

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\tightlist
\item
  Implementation as a national replacement for as many existing taxes as
  possible (council tax, stamp duty land tax, inheritance tax on land,
  TV license fee, etc.).
\item
  Use of this tax as a macroeconomic stabilizer (the bank of England
  could increment this tax in order to avoid propose and to ensure that
  real terms house prices decline gradually to more reasonable levels).
\item
  Introduction of `land value covenants', similar to `government
  mortgages' but with the interest paid proportional to local land
  values. Those who have difficulty paying the tax(for example because
  they are asset rich or income poor) would have the option to roll up
  the tax into an indefinite `interest payment' index to the value of
  the land.
\item
  Some time threshold for any residual freehold ownership (e.g.~99
  years).
\end{enumerate}

A land value tax on built up land would take the total value of the
property and subtract the value of the building. Both values are easily
assessed: for example there are multiple websites accessing overall
property value. The advantage of subtracting property value is also that
beautiful and historic buildings, and those that contribute to the
character of areas can be recognize as such. This subsidy on building
size would work well as a way to mitigate the increase of fossil fuel
taxes on household energy bills.

\newpage

\hypertarget{part-11-money-debt-and-financial-repression}{%
\section{PART 11: MONEY, DEBT AND FINANCIAL
REPRESSION}\label{part-11-money-debt-and-financial-repression}}

\hypertarget{summary-5}{%
\subsection{Summary}\label{summary-5}}

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  The correct and responsible role of debt is as a useful tool for
  selective application, to make early use of a longer-term investment
  that one (individual, firm or nation) has a high degree of certainty
  one will be able to afford. It should not be a system of dependency to
  repeatedly shore up insufficient cash-flow.
\item
  Irresponsible private debt can be discouraged through more-regulated
  lending and a higher tax on bank balance-sheets.
\item
  Economic situations forcing individuals into debt can be mitigated
  with higher wages and/or higher net income due to a citizen's
  dividend.
\item
  Financial instability is socially damaging and unnecessary; it can be
  mitigated with a financial taxes explained here.
\end{itemize}

This part is split into the following chapters indicating different
types of tax on banks/debt, transactions or money:

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\tightlist
\item
  Taxing Banking: the bank balance sheet levy and other ways to tax
  financial institutions such as a specific profits tax
\item
  Taxing Financial Transactions: both in finance and more generally in
  the economy
\item
  Financial `Repression': reducing public debt through inflation,
  growth, monetisation of debt
\item
  Demurrage: Taxes on money balances
\end{enumerate}

\hypertarget{taxing-bank-balance-sheets-and-profits}{%
\section{11.1: Taxing Bank Balance Sheets and
Profits}\label{taxing-bank-balance-sheets-and-profits}}

\hypertarget{introduction}{%
\subsection{Introduction}\label{introduction}}

\newthought{For many people,} financial services are an opaque and
mysterious business. For many people, banks are places to store
hard-earned money or get a loan. However the relationship between these
two, the operation of other financial products and the relationship of
banks to the wider economy is a puzzle. A study by ESCP Europe in June
2010 found that the general population is not well informed about the
banking system, with little awareness of the status of their deposits
and what banks do with them.

The financial crisis of 2007-8, whose interconnected causes are still
being teased out and debated by experts, has only exacerbated this sense
that understanding `finance' is not possible for normal people. Several
studies have found a substantial deterioration in public attitudes
towards the UK Banking Industry following the crisis. A report by YouGov
Cambridge in 2013, found that only 4 percent of those surveyed thought
that the banks observe high moral and ethical standards - a joint worst
rating with betting shops, casinos and online gambling.

\hypertarget{functions-of-the-financial-sector}{%
\subsection{Functions of the Financial
Sector}\label{functions-of-the-financial-sector}}

Yet despite its failings, the financial sector exists to serve a useful
purpose. As Philip Booth wrote in the 2011 edition of Balance, the
British Banker's Association magazine,

\begin{quote}
``Life would be unthinkable without banks. Not only do banks provide
mechanisms to ensure that we can pay each other immediately for the
goods and services we consume, they also provide crucial economic
functions. These include screening risk, diversifying risk, reducing
transaction costs and providing capital for businesses and credit for
consumers. The flip side is that they provide safe returns for savers.
Without a modern financial system, retirement from work would be more or
less impossible.'' *
\end{quote}

Lord Adair Turner, who was the Chairman of the Financial Services
Authority from 2008 to 2013 has written in more technical terms on this
topic. Turner argues (FSA \protect\hyperlink{ref-FSA2009}{2009}) that
the purpose of the financial system is as follows:

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\tightlist
\item
  The provision of payment services, both retail and wholesale.
\item
  The provision of pure insurance services, life or general, wholesale
  and retail, which enable people or businesses to lay off exposure to
  risks by pooling their exposure with others.
\item
  The creation of markets in spot or short-term futures instruments in,
  for instance, foreign exchange and commodities.
\item
  Financial intermediation between providers of funds and users of
  funds, savers and borrowers, investors and businesses, an
  intermediation which plays a crucial role in capital allocation within
  the economy. This function can be split in turn into four
  sub-functions: pooling of risks; maturity transformation via balance
  sheet intermediation; maturity transformation via the provision of
  market liquidity; and risk return transformation.
\end{enumerate}

We might argue that the wider economic purpose of the financial system
is to support the production of goods and services that contribute to
personal, social and environmental well-being. We could also say that
finance should build up the real wealth of the economy, financing
productive investment and export sectors such as manufacturing. Finance
should be the servant, not the master, of the real economy.

\hypertarget{reasons-for-taxing-finance}{%
\subsection{Reasons for Taxing
Finance}\label{reasons-for-taxing-finance}}

The financial system is therefore at the centre of our economy. Taxation
of such a sector must be carefully planned as it may have ramifications
on many other parts of society. A report on financial sector taxation by
the European Commission in 2010 identified three policy goals in taxing
finance:

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  Reduce the size of the financial sector where its social costs in
  terms of debt and fragility are greater than its benefit
\item
  Ensure finance pays a fair share
\item
  Pay society back for the financial crisis, which was arguably caused
  by a reckless financial behaviour of the sector.
\end{itemize}

We argue there are additional reasons for taxing finance, money and
debt. These are outlined below:

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\tightlist
\item
  Finance is supported implicitly by the central bank and that benefit
  should be paid for.
\item
  Finance typically caters to the needs of the super rich. Taxing
  finance can have positive distributive effects, if done right
\item
  Taxing finance can increase incentives to invest productively
\item
  Debt does not share in economic downturns, and therefore makes the
  system more fragile. Taxing debt could reduce incentives to create
  debt, reducing risk and increasing resilience of the system
\item
  Helping debtors as opposed to creditors is associated with productive
  economic situations and peaceful futures
\item
  The history of public debt management suggests that the government's
  policy towards interest rates, growth and inflation is highly
  significant in terms of the evolution of public debt\footnote{Between
    the two world wars, the UK government adopted a system of fiscal
    austerity and high interest rates to return to the gold standard at
    pre-war parity. The results were disastrous: mass unemployment and
    an increase in the public debt-to-GDP ratio. On the other hand,
    after WW2, growth, moderate inflation and low interest rates were
    the norm. The debt came down from over 200\% of GDP in the late
    1940s to around 70\% by the 1970s. We might say that the best way to
    reduce the public debt is not to worry about it}.
\end{enumerate}

\hypertarget{taxing-finance-in-the-uk}{%
\subsection{Taxing Finance in the UK}\label{taxing-finance-in-the-uk}}

Financial services pay a variety of taxes in the UK. In addition to the
taxes that all companies pay, banks are also subject to a bank levy on
their total assets (which is to be replaced by a surcharge on profits
made by financial companies). The estimated total contribution of the
financial sector was approximately £66.6 billion in the year ending 31
March 2015. Banks account for about two thirds of this, other financial
institutions the remaining third (PWC
\protect\hyperlink{ref-PWC2015}{2015}).

\hypertarget{the-bank-balance-sheet-tax-bank-levy}{%
\subsection{The Bank Balance Sheet Tax (Bank
levy)}\label{the-bank-balance-sheet-tax-bank-levy}}

Specific to banks, we have the bank levy or bank balance sheet tax. It
is a levy on the total equity and liabilities on the bank balance sheet.

A bank balance sheet consists of assets such as loans, and liabilities
such as deposits. A loan is an asset because it is hopefully paid back
to the bank. A deposit is a liability because it may be recalled by the
depositor . The assets are equal to the liabilities plus the bank's
equity. And so a bank balance sheet tax is a tax on the total size of
these assets and liabilities.

The bank levy was introduced in 2011 with the purpose of raising £2.5
billion a year from banks operating in the United Kingdom. It was
justified as a way of forcing banks to contribute more after the
financial crisis and to discourage risky borrowing. The levy only
impacts foreign banks on their UK balance sheets, whereas UK banks pay
tax on both their domestic activities and their global balance sheets.
Banking institutions and groups are only liable to pay the levy where
their relative aggregate liabilities exceed £20 billion.

After its implementation, the UK levy increased gradually in each year
of its existence until 2015, when it was announced that that it would
gradually be decreased over the subsequent six years and would stop
applying to worldwide assets from 2021. The reduction will be from
0.21\% to 0.1\%.

The reduction was in response to complaints from UK banks that it put
them at a competitive disadvantage. In June 2015, the Chief of the
British Banker's Association, Anthony Browne, also warned that the levy
was costing London jobs and risked causing banks to move their
operations overseas, saying:

\begin{quote}
`The global banks constantly review where they base their business
around the world, how much they put in London, New York, Singapore,
Tokyo - the trouble is that in London the negative side has got so much
longer and positive side shorter. For a lot of them, they've reached a
tipping point, and move the operations elsewhere.' *
\end{quote}

In fact, although banks threatened to leave the country and HSBC did a
long review, none carried out their threat (although the Brexit vote is
likely to have a much more serious effect).

The base of the bank levy was initially twofold: both lending in the UK
financial system \emph{and} the global lending of UK-based banks. One
can see a justification in both but they are very different from the
point of view of the incentives of banks to be based in the UK.

The first approach (UK lending) does not discriminate between UK based
or non-UK banks - all banks that lend in the UK financial system would
be covered. Whereas the second approach discourages large global banks
to locate here. Therefore it seems that the first approach could sustain
a higher rate without affecting bank location.

\hypertarget{bank-corporation-tax-surcharge}{%
\subsection{Bank Corporation Tax
Surcharge}\label{bank-corporation-tax-surcharge}}

Whilst reducing the bank levy, in 2011, the government imposed a Bank
Corporation Tax surcharge. This is an additional 8\% tax on the profits
of banking companies above an annual £25 million profit allowance.

There is therefore a key difference in operation between the bank levy
and the surcharge. The levy is a tax on the bank's total assets, whereas
the surcharge is a tax on profits. The surcharge was projected to raise
6.5 billion pounds between 2016/17 and 2020/21. Introduced at the same
time as the winding down of the bank levy, the surcharge has received
mixed reviews from financial institutions.

Some consider that with the removal of the bank levy, and the relatively
low Corporation tax rate of 18\%, the surcharge is a manageable cost.
Others have argued that the surcharge impedes so-called `Challenger'
banks, which are new banks established since the global financial
crises. Many of these formally avoided the bank levy because their
liabilities did not exceed the threshold £20 billion. However, they are
now subject to the corporation tax surcharge on their profits. Some
claim that the surcharge will make it difficult for new banks to enter
the market and secure investment.

\hypertarget{bank-levies-in-europe}{%
\subsection{Bank Levies in Europe}\label{bank-levies-in-europe}}

The United Kingdom is not the only European country to have introduced a
bank levy. Since 2009, 14 countries almost exclusively in the European
Union have introduced levies. Many of these levies were instituted in
response to a 2010 report by the IMF which proposed the idea of a bank
levy (which they called the `financial stability contribution'). Its
explicit aim was to produce a contribution from the banking sector to
compensate government for the cost of guarantees and bailouts, and
secondly to reduce the risk of future banking crises.

The below table shows all the European banking levies as of 2015 (Kogler
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Kogler2015}{2015}).

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}lllll@{}}
\toprule
\begin{minipage}[b]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
Tax Base\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
Tax Rates\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
Exemptions\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
Use of Funds\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
Austria 1.1.2011\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
Total Liabilities\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
EUR 20bn: 0.09\%, EUR 20bn: 0.11\%\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
Equity, Insured Deposits Allowance: EUR 1bnSurcharge: 45\% until
2017\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
Treasury\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
Belgium 1.1.2012\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
Total Liabilities\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
0.035\%\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
Regulatory Capital,Insured Deposits\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
ResolutionFund\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
Germany 1.1.2011\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
Total LiabilitiesDerivatives\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
France 1.1.2011\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
Regulatory Capital\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
Hungary 27.9.2010\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
Total Assets\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
Netherlands 1.10.2012\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
Total Liabilities\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
Slovakia 1.1.2012\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
Total Liabilities\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
Sweden 30.12.2009\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
Liabilities and Provisions\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
UK 1.1.2011\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
Total Liabilities\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.17\columnwidth}\raggedright
\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

France and Germany have both introduced levies, though they differ from
each other in several respects. One major difference is in the basis for
the levy, i.e.~which part of the bank's holdings are being taxed by the
levy. Both the UK and Germany tax the bank's total equity and
liabilities, subject to certain exceptions. The French levy, however, is
charged on minimum regulatory capital. Another difference pertains to
where the collected funds are directed. The proceeds of the UK and
French levy are directed into general revenues, whereas the German
proceeds feed into a fund, to be drawn upon in the event of a financial
crisis. Also the UK and France determine the tax base on a
global/consolidated basis, while the German levy is imposed solely on a
single entity. There are several other differences between the three
levies, not the least being their expected yield and rate. For a
detailed analysis of the differences, see the report by Sullivan and
Cromwell (Sullivan \& Cromwell LLP
\protect\hyperlink{ref-SullivanCromwellLLP2011}{2011}).

As we discussed, the UK bank levy was criticised on the basis that it
placed banks at a competitive disadvantage. The German bank levy has
also drawn some criticism, and debate as to whether it is achieving its
goals. The German levy was intended to generate resources for the fund,
and to internalise bank's contributions to systemic risk. In 2014,
Deutsche Bank produced a report, evaluating the effects of the German
bank levy on bank behaviour. They found that the revenues raised through
the levy were lower than expected, because of low tax rates and high tax
thresholds for exemptions. They also found that the levy did appear to
influence bank behaviour, with evidence of a reduction in lending and
higher deposit rates.

However a comprehensive study of bank levies across Europe produced by
Michael Kogler of the University of St Gallen Institute of Economics in
2015 (Kogler \protect\hyperlink{ref-Kogler2015}{2015}) found that bank
levies tend to lead to a raise in lending rates but do not significantly
affect deposit rates. This suggests that the cost of the levy tends to
be passed on to borrowers. They found that the amount passed on to
borrowers is determined by bank competition (i.e.~where banking markets
are concentrated and have low competition), more of the levy cost is
passed on to borrowers through an increased interest rate. They also
found that less of the levy cost is passed on to customers by
well-capitalised banks, possibly because they are less exposed to the
levy.

\hypertarget{conclusion-on-bank-levies-bank-balance-taxes}{%
\subsection{Conclusion on Bank levies/ bank balance
taxes}\label{conclusion-on-bank-levies-bank-balance-taxes}}

The bank levy is a tax which is in existence and which raises some
revenue, albeit at a low rate. Despite threats to move their operations
from the UK, no banks have done so for this reason and if the tax was
imposed solely on UK lending, they would have no reason for doing so.
The tax also meets our earlier criteria for taxes, namely that `we want
to tax things that either we want to go away or that don't go away when
we tax them'.We want to reduce the levels of unproductive debt (such as
money to buy existing assets), and direct it to more productive
purposes. Debt is a form of wealth and should be taxed
appropriately.\footnote{Add ways to distinguish productive and
  unproductive debt taxes}

\hypertarget{taxing-financial-transactions}{%
\section{11.2 Taxing Financial
Transactions}\label{taxing-financial-transactions}}

\hypertarget{introduction-1}{%
\subsection{Introduction}\label{introduction-1}}

Bank levies are taxes on the balance sheets of banks. Transaction taxes
on the other hand, are (as the name suggests), taxes on either transfers
of money (including on ledgers) or transfers of ownership. This means
that the parties to a transaction, pay a tiny percentage of the value of
the transaction in tax. These taxes (and in particular taxes on Foreign
exchange trading) are also known as `Tobin' taxes, after Nobel Laureate
James Tobin, who proposed the tax as a means of `throwing sand in the
wheel' and slowing down `excessive' trading.

Of course there are many types of transactions. Some types of
transactions are already covered by the existing tax system, for example
salaries, dividends and expenditure. (e.g.~Income Tax and VAT).
Transaction taxes (TT) focus either on other types of transaction, such
as the buying and selling of land, financial securities or currencies,
or they focus on all transactions mediated through banks. Accordingly,
Matheson (2011) distinguishes between types of transaction tax:

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  A bank transaction tax (BTT) on the value of inward deposits and/or
  withdrawals from bank accounts.
\item
  A securities transaction tax (STT) on change of ownership of
  securities, such as the UK's Stamp Duty.
\item
  A currency transaction tax (CTT) on foreign currency exchanges.
\item
  A capital levy on issuance of new share capital.
\end{itemize}

Proponents of FTT's argue that the tax discourages economically
unproductive activities. FTTs make short-term investments more expensive
relative to long-term investments and may thereby reduce excessive
speculative short-term trading. This enhances market stability and
encourages the financing of real, productive ventures. Proponents also
argue that FTTs are effective in raising revenue and are simple to
administer.

Critics, on the other hand argue that FTTs increase the costs of raising
capital, thereby discouraging investment and reduce the ability for
smaller corporations to finance projects. They also argue that FTTs are
ineffective, as the research on the outcomes of FTTs in different
countries has often had contradictory or inconclusive findings.

\hypertarget{ftt-case-studies}{%
\subsection{FTT Case Studies}\label{ftt-case-studies}}

Reviewing the experiences and outcomes of FTTs in different countries
reveals that the ability of an FTT to raise revenue and its effect on
markets is dependent on the particular design of the FTT.

\textbf{Taiwan}

The Taiwanese FTT was instituted in 1965, starting at a uniform rate of
0.15 percent. It has evolved into a system of differentiated rates of
taxation, ie different rates for shares, bonds, futures and options.
Economist Kapoor suggests that this graduated regime can be considered
FTT `best-practice', as it allows government to fine tune the tax for
different products and keeps open the option of adjusting the rates as
circumstances require.

The Taiwanese FTT has been very successful in raising revenue, and in
2008, accounted for 5.5\% of total tax revenue. Taiwan also has strict
anti-avoidance measures including transfer pricing rules and disclosure
requirements. as well as fines for failure to register transactions.

According to Beitler (Beitler
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Beitler2010}{2010}), `Taiwan provides an
excellent example of a sophisticated FTT that has regulatory effect
through a multi-tiered system of tax rates, but also raises significant
revenue for the government.'

\textbf{Brazil}

Brazil has introduced and abolished several forms of Bank debit tax
since 1993. Their longest running bank debit tax was the
\emph{Contribuicao provisoria sobre movimentacao ou transmissao de
valores e de creditos e direitos de natureza financier (CPMF)} , which
was in place from 1997 to 2008.

The tax was imposed on debits by non-bank depositors from current,
investment, time deposit and savings accounts, with some exceptions. Its
performance in raising revenue was consistent and strong.

Beitler sites three reasons that the productivity of the tax does not
appear to have been affected by rate increases. Firstly, she suggests
that the final rate was not excessively high. Also, the banking system
in Brazil is sophisticated and widely used and finally, the tax was
levied on bank debts only, not debits and credits.

There is some evidence that the CPMF affected investment behaviour,
leading to a 40 \% increase in demand deposits. It may also have
contributed to the migration of business from the San Paolo Stock
exchange to overseas markets, although there are likely to have been
multiple factors.

\textbf{Japan}

Japan introduced a securities transaction tax in 1953, which underwent
several rate changes in the ensuing years until abolition in 1999. The
rates in that period ranged from 0.1 to 0.3 \% for stocks and 0.08 to
0.16 for corporate bonds.

During the 1980s, the tax raised a significant amount of revenue, at one
point reaching US\$12 billion per year. After its abolition in 1999, the
data suggests that there were increases in trade, and increases in price
volatility.

\textbf{United Kingdom}

The government applies a 0.5\%\footnote{(confirm this)} tax, known as
stamp duty, to the transfer of shares in companies with a UK Stock
register. The revenue accrued has been substantial and stable over many
years. The cost of collection is low as the tax is collected
electronically. Research suggests that the stamp duty has not had a
material impact on trading in the London Stock Exchange, although
announcements of rate changes are correlated with changes in the UK
equity index. (Saporta and Kan, 1997).

Unlike in the Swedish case below, the stamp duty cannot be avoided
through trading in overseas markets as it is required to make the
transfer of ownership legally binding. It is an internationally applied
tax on domestically registered companies. Contrast this with the Swedish
case below, which instituted a domestic tax on international capital.

\textbf{Sweden}

The Swedish case may be cited as an example of `how not to' design a
financial transaction tax. Their FTT was introduced in 1984 as a 0.5\%
tax on both the purchase and the sale of equities. The rate was
increased in 1986 but by 1991, the tax was abolished.

This was largely because of disappointing revenues from the tax and high
levels of avoidance. As the tax applied only to transactions undertaken
in Sweden, there was a strong motive for traders to move their
activities overseas, and after the 1986 rate increase, 60 \% of the most
actively traded Swedish stocks had migrated to London. According to
Beitler, `The underlying design flaw was that the tax did not apply to
Swedish citizens or Swedish assets per se, but to transactions
undertaken in Sweden.'

\hypertarget{discussion-of-ftts}{%
\subsection{Discussion of FTTs}\label{discussion-of-ftts}}

Thus international experience seems to suggest that financial
transaction taxes can be powerful instruments to raise revenue, however
much depends on their particular design. Beitler argues that the most
successful taxes are simpler and have a lower rate. Taxes that levy only
one-way transactions have few exemptions, less evasion and higher
productivity.

Similarly, there is a great deal of variation in the market impact of
the taxes, which can be alleviated by adjustments to rate and design, as
demonstrated by the UK and Sweden comparison. FTTs must be carefully
designed to minimise evasion through migration of trades to overseas
markets.

There are two general motivations for transaction taxes: to alleviate
short term behaviour and to raise revenue. Some have pointed to the very
large volume of transactions in developed financial markets such as
London. Even at a low rate, it is argued, a transaction tax would raise
a lot of revenue. But it seems that the location of these transactions
is extremely sensitive to the tax. Even a small tax might cause a large
part of these transactions to move elsewhere. This movement of financial
activity might even reduce tax revenue from other taxes
(e.g.~corporation tax) more than the revenue raised from the transaction
tax. This effect would only however happen with a unilateral tax.

Therefore, it seems that the most appropriate way to go is to support an
international tax at such a level that it would have a beneficial effect
on reducing short-term speculation, and assess the revenue raised. A
number of countries could coordinate this approach. We do not propose to
introduce a transactions tax unilaterally, except in the sense of making
the existing tax system more automatic.

\hypertarget{financial-repression}{%
\section{11.3: Financial Repression}\label{financial-repression}}

Growth in GDP is low in European countries, and the level of government
`debt' and of on-going public deficits are of public concern. In such
situations, lower or more negative real interest rates become an
important policy tool, because they have the effect both of stimulating
economic activity and of reducing the interest burden of public debt.

Financial repression refers to government control or manipulation of
credit markets in order to achieve fiscal ends, such as a reduction of
the interest rate paid on the government debt. Fiscal repression usually
involves a lowering of interest rates generally, in order perhaps to
lower them on government borrowing. Fiscal repression is often
associated with controls on the financial sector.

\hypertarget{purposes-of-financial-repression}{%
\subsection{Purposes of Financial
Repression}\label{purposes-of-financial-repression}}

The main purposes of fiscal repression are

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  To reduce the interest paid on government debt.
\item
  Reducing the power of creditors relative to debtors, which has two
  further objectives:
\item
  Redistributing income from rich to poor
\item
  Stimulating aggregate demand
\item
  Reducing the incentives for financially destabilizing increases in
  debt
\item
  Focusing lending onto the productive sector
\end{itemize}

\hypertarget{forms-of-financial-repression}{%
\subsection{Forms of Financial
Repression}\label{forms-of-financial-repression}}

There are a number of forms of fiscal repression;

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\tightlist
\item
  Monetization of deficits (The requirements for cash meant that in the
  1960s at least 20\% of government debt was financed through issuing
  money)
\item
  Controls on the interest rates charged (e.g.~Between 1600 and 1800,
  the UK had `usury laws', which set legal maximum limits for charging
  interest)
\item
  Forced saving (e.g.~as outlined in Keynes' `How To Pay for the War')
\item
  Reserve Ratios (e.g.~as practiced in China at present)
\item
  Negative interest rates on money (for example as proposed by Silvio
  Gesell and implemented in the Austrian town of Wörgl in the 1930s).
\item
  Capital controls (restrictions on the ability to move money between
  countries, as existed in the 1945-1980 period in the UK)
\item
  Credit controls (restrictions on the sectors in which financial
  institutions can create credit, as existed in the 1945-1980 period in
  the UK)
\item
  Taxes on financial credit creation (e.g.~a bank balance sheet tax, as
  implemented after the 2007 financial crisis in the UK)
\end{enumerate}

\hypertarget{history-of-financial-repression-in-the-uk}{%
\subsection{History of Financial Repression in the
UK}\label{history-of-financial-repression-in-the-uk}}

Financial repression in the form of usury laws UK between 1600 and 1815
was probably accidental rather than intentional and was associated with
Britain's rise as a world power with no defaults on its debt.

After world war 1, Britain wanted to repay its war debt and return to
the gold standard at pre-war levels; and imposed high interest rates and
increased taxes producing fiscal surpluses. But the period was
disastrous with falling prices, high unemployment and a public debt to
GDP ratio which did not significantly fall.

After 1945, Britain used fiscal repression (low or negative real
interest rates) combined with growth and full employment policies to
reduce its debt, this time very successfully.Government debt from 270\%
of GDP after WW2 to c. 70\% in the early 1970s.

After 1979, interest rates rose and fiscal repression ceased. After
2008: some elements of fiscal repression returned (e.g.~QE, low interest
rates), but there was also a culture of `austerity'.

\hypertarget{demurrage}{%
\section{11.4: Demurrage}\label{demurrage}}

Nominal interest rates are currently already at or near zero in most
developed countries (the `zero lower bound'). In this case, cutting real
interest rates further requires either negative nominal interest rates
or higher inflation.

Creating higher inflation in these situations is often very difficult.
It is usually expected that interest rates cannot be cut below zero.
Having a government fiscal deficits financed by issuing bonds or
printing money is an option. But in extreme situations this money or
bonds are simply stored. What could convince people to invest in real
products or spend money rather than just store it under the mattress or
in banks?

One option is that if you don't use it you lose it -- in other words,
money unspent would carry a small penalty.

But what would a negative interest rate mean in practice? It would mean
a carrying cost on base currency, known as \emph{demurrage}. That is,
there would be some form of charge for banks and individuals to hold
money. Interest on reserves would be paid \emph{to} the central bank.

There are several possible forms of demurrage. One form is a tax on
money balances, implemented by requiring that holders of banknotes pay a
certain charge every month in order to keep their notes legal tender. In
current times, demurrage would be a negative intrinsic interest rate on
base money and would therefore, in addition to stamped banknotes or
similar, require the payment of negative interest rates on bank reserves
held at the central bank. The primary purpose of demurrage is to
encourage the circulation of money, ie the exchange of money to for
goods and services, rather than the holding of money.

The idea of a monthly charge to keep notes legal tender may seem very
implausible and possibly undesirable to the reader. However, demurrage
has been implemented in the past with great success. One of the most
famous examples is known as the `Miracle of Worgl'. Worgl was a small
town in Austria which was suffering high unemployment and poverty during
the Great Depression. To tackle this, the new Mayor case up with a
radical solution; he issued a `Stamp Script' which was a form of money.
A stamp had to be applied each month at a cost of 1\% of the face value,
in order to keep the script legal tender. The stamp script was extremely
successful in stimulating the local economy. The fast circulating money
enabled Worgl to redress unemployment, compete infrastructure projects
and increase tax revenue. Surrounding towns copied the scheme, with
success, until the project was forcibly ended by the Austrian Central
Bank.

Worgl's Mayor, when announcing the demurrage scheme to the township,
rather poetically expressed its purpose and method.

'\emph{Slow circulation of money is the principal cause of the faltering
economy. Money as a medium of exchange increasingly vanishes out of
working people's hands. It seeps away into channels where interest flows
and accumulates in the hands of a few, who do not return it back to the
market for the purchasing of goods and services but withhold it for
speculation.}

\emph{As money is an indispensable wheel in the machine of production,
an accumulation of great sums in a few hands means a gigantic danger for
peaceful production. Every time the flow of money is interrupted, so is
the exchange of goods and services, with a consequent fall in
employment. Uncertainty about the state of the economy makes the owner
of money careful, causing him/her to hoard it or to spend it
reluctantly. He or she distrusts investment. Money circulation is thus
slowed down, the turnover of goods and services shrinks and jobs
disappear. Such a situation denies incentives to the population,
threatening peace and wealth with destruction. Whole nations and states
are under the threat of ruin.}

\emph{Our small place cannot liberate the world, but we want at least to
give a sign. In the Wörgl area the sluggish, slow-circulating National
Bank currency shall be replaced with a medium of exchange with a better
circulating performance than ordinary money. `Certified Compensation
Bills' shall be issued in denominations of 1, 5 and 10 Schillings and
put into circulation. The council shall issue the Bills and the public
shall undertake to accept such Bills at their full nominal value in
payment for goods and services. In order to turnaround the economy of
the township, public works shall be planned and paid for with the same
Bills.'} (Shwarz \protect\hyperlink{ref-Shwarz1951}{1951})

\hypertarget{conclusion}{%
\section{11.5: Conclusion}\label{conclusion}}

Money, bonds and other forms of debt involve someone who will pay money
back (debtor) and someone who will be repaid (creditor). They are
therefore forms of private wealth for creditors and fall under our
wealth tax. Finance also involves taking care of transactions between
individuals and companies. Therefore, in this section we investigate
taxes on money, debt, and transactions.

We apply our general principle that we want to tax things that either we
want to go away or that don't go away when we tax them. Taxes on debt,
especially unproductive debt satisfy this criteria in the sense that we
wish to reduce the overall level of debt and to target it towards
productive purposes.

It also seems plausible that debt is a tax base that is less likely to
move than one on financial transactions, because lending in
international markets is difficult, whereas transactions are easily
moved both within international financial institutions and offshore.
Therefore it seems that a bank balance tax or a tax on unproductive
lending (for example mortgage lending) is the right approach.

\newpage

\hypertarget{part-12-environment-health-and-resources}{%
\section{PART 12: ENVIRONMENT, HEALTH, AND
RESOURCEs}\label{part-12-environment-health-and-resources}}

\hypertarget{introduction-2}{%
\section{12.1 Introduction}\label{introduction-2}}

\begin{quote}
\emph{`Future generations are unlikely to condone our lack of prudent
concern for the integrity of the natural world that supports all life'}
(Carson \protect\hyperlink{ref-Carson1962}{1962})
\end{quote}

\begin{quote}
\emph{`For the sake of civilized society, it's time we truly figure out
how to enable economic growth, while keeping intact the very grounds
upon which all prosperity is based; clean air, fertile soil, metals and
minerals and all natural resources that enable us to flourish as human
beings.'}

\hfill --- H.R.H. Prince Carlos de Bourbon de Parme (2014)
\end{quote}

\newthought{The Earth is facing} a great number of environmental
problems; many of which are caused or contributed to by human economic
activity. Everything - from the lakes we drink from, the air we breathe,
and the food we eat - is being impacted by irresponsible human action.

This chapter is devoted to reducing the harm caused to the environment
and human health by economic activity such as burning fossil fuels or
excessive production and consumption of red meat. We also investigate
the distributional effects of resource extraction and consumption, in
particular the financial surplus that accrue to whoever controls the
land on which they are extracted from.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}c@{}}
\toprule
\includegraphics{OtherPictures/EnvironmentalIssues.png}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\emph{Figure 12.1 Key Environmental Issues}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

Economic activity often causes damage which is not accounted for by the
polluting parties themselves, but rather borne by those who have done
little to cause them. Manufacturing businesses pumping out
CO\textsubscript{2} into the atmosphere have little or no obligation to
pay for the damage that climate change causes in communities and
countries across the world. Resulting `damage costs' often can be
ignored because they affect third parties and may be difficult to
quantify, and difficult to locate the direct source for. These costs are
known as `negative externalities'

Negative externalities can be accounted for (or `internalised') if an
economic actor has to pay for the cost of the damage via a tax. This is
known as a Pigouvian tax (after Arthur Cecil Pigou, a British
economist), and are thought to disincentivise the damage-causing
economic activity. Companies and individuals will be motivated to find
less damaging alternatives to the polluting economic activities when
these damage costs fall on them. They act not altruistically, but to
reduce their tax bill (Pigou \protect\hyperlink{ref-Pigou1932}{1932}).

There are some difficulties with applying taxes on resource consumption
and environmental or health bads. Such taxes can be difficult to
quantify, costly to apply, sometimes unpopular, and they may fall harder
on those with lower incomes. In particular the `incentive' effect of a
green tax may need to be substantial in order to have the desired
effect; but high externality taxes can often be unpopular. Thus in using
the revenues from environmental taxes we can focus on the possible
economic co-benefits of them on one hand, or we can focus on political
resistance to them.

If we are focussed on the economic, we may be able to use Pigouvian
taxes to reduce other taxes, i.e.~a `Green Tax Shift'. This could be
particularly beneficial if they replace taxes on productive activities
(a double-dividend).

\^{}\^{}

On the other hand, if we are focused on environmental issues and
political acceptability, we may refrain from raising net funds from the
tax shift. Instead we may wish to give the money back to the population.
We discuss two possible strategies here, an output subsidy on goods
produced (especially electricity), and a payment to everyone in society
(a citizen's dividend)

In relation to natural resources there is a second important concept --
Resource Rent. We have been familiar with the notion of rent from our
chapter on land.\footnote{Land rent is the payment made to the landowner
  by the occupier of the land, whether land has buildings on it or not.
  It is the private value associated with ownership of the land, net of
  any costs associated with making use of the land. So the land rent of
  a landowner's field is roughly the value of the land (strictly
  speaking, the unimproved land) if he were to rent the land out on the
  open market. This rental value is clearly closely associated with the
  surplus that the land can producte - value of the foodstuffs that he
  produces, net the costs of his time and other expenditures needed to
  get those resources to market. Resource rent is similar but is
  calculated per unit of a commodity.}

Resource rent the excess of the sale price of the resource over the cost
of production. And, just like land rent, it is associated with control
of the rights to extract the natural resource from a piece of land. So
the resource rent of oil extracted in a certain place is the sale price
of the oil minus the cost of extraction.

Thus in the economics of environment and resources we distinguish two
sorts of argument. The first criticism is that the world economy is
doing radically the wrong activities, because the cost on the
environment is not considered. The second critique is that the purchase
of resources gives large transfer payments to those who diserve them
least. But the two are linked. As Al Gore once put it ``We're borrowing
money from China to buy oil from the Persian Gulf to burn it in ways
that destroy the planet. Every bit of that's got to change.''

We will deal with resource rents: ie the distributional consequences of
the production side of resources in the next section, and then devote
the rest of the chapter to negative externalities and other bads from
the perpective of consumption..

\hypertarget{resource-rents}{%
\section{12.2 Resource Rents \^{}\^{}}\label{resource-rents}}

Resource rents represent unearned income in the form of natural
resources yet to be extracted. Resource revenues are different to
general government revenues in two key ways. First, revenues are
volatile because they are driven largely by volatile commodity prices,
and they are, in principle, temporary. Secondly, natural resources
represent the commons: all citizens have an equal claim on them, and
unlike income-based government revenues, they have not been appropriated
from anyone so represent `distributions' as opposed to `redistributions'
(Segal, Segal, and Paul \protect\hyperlink{ref-Segal2012}{2012}).

However, a large body of work suggests that having a large resource
sector has adverse affects on a country's economy, institutions and
politics. These effects are collectively known as the 'resource curse
(Ploeg \protect\hyperlink{ref-Ploeg2011}{2011}). A key part of these
arguments is that resource revenues are frequently misused, wasted, or
lost to corruption (Segal, Segal, and Paul
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Segal2012}{2012}). However, a statistical review
found that in general resource wealth does not cause poor institutional
or political outcomes such as a tendency for authoritarianism (Haber et
al. \protect\hyperlink{ref-Haber2011}{2011}). Resource rents also have
significant potential to increase the welfare of citizens, if correctly
managed.

We will argue here for \emph{competion} over the capture of resource
rents. Oil producers can be taxed or nationalised, as already happens in
the UK and elsewhere. Furthermore big oil producers could reduce their
production in order to increase the oil price (although this might
stimulate competors). This is the \emph{producer side} capture of
resource rents.

But also, through the same taxes that correct for externalities (Carbon
taxes and taxes on rare metal consumption for example), \emph{consuming
countries} can also attempt to lower the global market price of
resources such as fossil fuels, and therefore their bil resource rentsl.
Here, therefore we recommend coordinated taxes on externalities and
resource rents not only to reduce transfer payments from resource
consuming to resource producing countries.

Potential competion between consumer and producer countries to capture
resource rents could be benefitial to the environment too. We are used
to rent seeking being negative This `rent seeking' game, could reduce
the overall amount of resources extracted.

\hypertarget{producer-country-capture-of-resource-rents}{%
\subsection{Producer Country Capture of Resource
Rents}\label{producer-country-capture-of-resource-rents}}

The notion of `resource nationalism', in the sense that resources belong
to the country in which they are located and should be used for that
country's benefit, is a principle codified in numerous international
treaties on human rights. This is actually a relatively recent
development. Paul Segal of King's College London explains this historic
shift (Segal, Segal, and Paul \protect\hyperlink{ref-Segal2012}{2012}):

\begin{quote}
\emph{'The twentieth century saw a dramatic reorientation of resource
ownership rights. First the principle that subsoil resources are owned
by governments as opposed to private landowners was settled in almost
all countries (private land in the US being the only major exception),
with private agents gaining access to them through regulated
contracts\ldots{}}

\emph{\ldots{}More dramatically, decolonisation led to an assertion of
the rights of developing country governments and a massive swing in
bargaining power in their favour, away from the international mining
companies and their rich-country owners that had dominated the industry.
The development of national oil and mining companies was part of this
trend.'}
\end{quote}

In some parts of the world, resource rents have been used to create
schemes known as `severance tax trust funds', which have specific remits
to invest in projects for various kinds of public benefit. The Alaska
Permanent Fund, created in 1976, is perhaps the best-known example. The
fund pays a per-capita dividend to citizens, based on the principle of
common ownership. Severance tax trust funds are also in place in
Montana, New Mexico, Utah, North Dakota and Wyoming.

Philosopher Thomas Pogge has advanced an alternative vision for resource
rents that is based not on resource nationalism, but resource globalism.
Pogge presented his idea of a `global resources dividend' as a means of
tackling global poverty (Pogge \protect\hyperlink{ref-Pogge1998}{1998}).
However, such a system would require significant international
coordination, and critics have suggested the distributive effects could
anyway harm poor nations that are not resource-rich (Hayward
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Hayward2005}{2005}). We propose that UK producer
resource rents could help contribute to a national citizen's dividend.

\hypertarget{consumer-country-capture-of-resource-rents}{%
\subsection{Consumer Country Capture of Resource
Rents}\label{consumer-country-capture-of-resource-rents}}

This use of resource consuimption taxes to \emph{reduce} resource rents
is an additional justification for taxes on fossil fuels and other
externalities. Indeed, we argue, the optimal coordinated tax would
include the optimal capture of rent as well as the global extenalities.

Firstly, just like the landlord in our desert island story, resource
rent is a surplus without any associated obligation. It's associated
with the violence of whichever group has seized effective control of the
rents in the first place, or has bought such control with funds found
from other sources. Perhaps because decause resource rent is associated
with violence and control more than any specific competence, it seems
that resource rents are often associated with authoritarian regimes
(e.g.~Saudi Arabia) or with states with a large degree of conflict
(e.g.~DR Congo).

Thus whilst the battle for resource rents between consuming countries
(who want to reduce the price of fossil fuels and other resources) and
producting countries (who want to increase the market price of fossil
fuels) seems like a zero sum game, in fact the payments often make
violence, terrorism or inequality worse - they are a lose-lose
proposition for the people of both countries. What's more they do not
encourgage developing countries to move up the value chain.

Second, increased resource rent is associated with transfers between
countries. But if the resource rent goes up, just like if your landlord
puts up the rent, there is no extra value for the extra money. In other
words, the price of fossil fuels is a monopoly price not a cost of
production. These transfer payments from resource importers to resource
exporters can have some serious consequences.

Consider the 1970s oil shocks, where after both shocks, oil importers
suddenly paid oil exporters roughly four times more for a barrel of oil,
could actually be compared to the reparations extracted by 1920s
Germany. Both involved payments of hard currency (gold, or dollars) for
no additional value in the other direction. It's no surprise that these
payments (for much more expensive oil and for war reparations) caused a
combination of low growth and high inflation.

What is the consequence of this? There is a collective interest in
resource consuming countries reducing their consumption, to reduce the
payments. In other words, it's possible that reducing the demand for
fossil fuels could reduce their open market price and thus improve the
economic well being of consuming countries.

Third, policies to reduce climate change often are associated only on
the demand side. The implicit assumption is often that oil and other
fossil fuels are priced according to the cost of production. Of course
there is a margin of production, but there is also monopoly-control
(OPEC), and `easy oil areas'. What is the implication for cimate change
policy? Well to tackle climate change we really need to leave fossil
fuel in the ground. That means \emph{increasing} the post tax price to
reduce demand, but also \emph{reducing} the pre-tax open market price of
fossil fuels. In that way, only the easiest to extract fossil fuels will
be so extracted.

This viewpoint also shows how challenging tackling climate change is. If
action reduces the price of fossil fuels, this price fall may also
increase demand in other parts of the world. This `rebound effect'
cautions against the idea that the global emissions reduction associated
with a national emissions reduction is the same as the original national
emissions reduction. Thus coordinated action is essential.

\hypertarget{the-case-for-coordinated-resource-rent-taxes}{%
\subsection{The Case for Coordinated Resource Rent
Taxes}\label{the-case-for-coordinated-resource-rent-taxes}}

Here we discuss coodrdination of countries to reduce the pre-tax price
of fossil fuels. It may seem perverse but to prevent fossil fuels being
extracted, their pretax price should fall below the cost of production.
This means that the'resource rent' would be reduced to zero.

An internationally-coordinated tax on the consumption of resources
(e.g.~oil and other fossil fuels, but also other scarce metals) is
therefore something of a `super-land value tax'. It's as efficient as a
land value tax, but more so because it prevents the flow of resource
rents out of the country. It is the opposite of the `oil price shock' of
the 1970s. It could be used to subsidise efficient urban transportation,
which is also likely to have positive co-benefits.

\^{}{[}Snippet to be delted: Unlike in countries without resources where
the incentives are to work hard and produce valuable products, in
resource-rich countries, the incentives are to be powerful enough to
control the resources. This is called the resource curse and we can see
that those regions which contain great oil reserves also contain
repressive regimes and political instability.Furthermore, high resource
rents involve a transfer of money from consuming to producing countries
which is against the interest of the consuming countries. Therefore, it
would be in consumers' interests to reduce the rent by limiting
consumption of oil through taxes and other measures.

Resource rent taxes can be charged both by consumers and by producers.
In that way there is competition between the two. There is already a tax
on profits from extraction of north sea oil and an aggregates levy.
These should be retained.

There could also be a rents tax on oil imposed by coordinated
internationally between oil-consuming countries. We propose an
internationally-coordinated tax on oil consumption. This should be
increased to reduce the open-market price of oil. Such a tax is
essential to reduce new exploration and the environmental damage it may
cause. It would also reduce trade deficits. Taxes on extraction of oil
should be retained. In principle they should include extraction of any
other high-rent natural resources, although oil appears to be the only
relevant natural resource in the case of the UK. Such taxes should be
coordinated between oil-consuming countries. Also, tackling climate
change requires that fossil fuels are no longer extracted. In order for
this to happen, the value of those fossil fuels on the open market needs
to be low or zero. In other words, the rent needs to be captured by
taxes in the consuming countries. A resource rent tax is, in effect, a
land value tax on resource rents which would otherwise be captured
overseas. {]}

\hypertarget{towards-a-total-fossil-phase-out}{%
\subsection{Towards a Total Fossil Phase
Out}\label{towards-a-total-fossil-phase-out}}

Whilst we are on the topic of the production side of fossil fuels, it
might be worth making a comment that may seem out of place as we have
not yet discussed climate change or carbon taxes in detail. There may
also be a case for setting a total fossil fuel phase out date, as a sort
of forward-looking regulation. In this case, it would be an expected
norm of behaviour that no fossil fuels are extracted from the ground
after that date. Now clearly it's going to be hard for the whole world
to agree on this norm. So it's therefore a question of how such a norm
could be defined and then gradually extended. The financial system may
provide a pressure point. Certain investments can be classified as 2C
compliant, or only consistent with a higher temperature target. Such a
process of classification can then lead to financial disenefits of those
financial institutions investing in anything related to new fossil fuel
extraction.

\hypertarget{taxing-bads}{%
\section{12.3 Taxing Bads}\label{taxing-bads}}

Having dealt with resource rents, we now move on to the other main
topic, negative externalities or 'bads. The world faces a range of
environmental problems which seem to be steadily getting worse. Ocean
acidification, climate change, fishery depletion, water resource
depletion and plastics in the oceans. It is evident that these are
mostly caused or worsened by human activity. We humans have developed
bad habits that we cannot seem to break, often because there is no
economic incentive to change. Why do we allow such tremendous
environmental destruction to result from our economic activity, and why
should we care? How could the tax system alter the balance of
incentives?

Many of these environmental problems are caused by economic
activity.\footnote{actions involving the production, distribution and
  consumption of goods and services} We are familiar with the example of
effluent from a factory poisoning nearby waterways for the surrounding
community. This is possible because the factory doesn't have to pay for
the damage they cause. Another way of saying this is that the factory
operators don't have to account for the full cost of their activities.

If I chop down a forest to sell the timber, the price at which I sell it
will account for my expenses incurred in chopping down the trees, the
cost of my labour, and any permits required. The price will \emph{not}
have accounted for the cost of destroying the ecological goods and
services\footnote{Ecological goods and services (EG\&S) are the benefits
  arising from the ecological functions of ecosystems. Such benefits
  accrue to all living organisms, including animals and plants, rather
  than to humans alone.} (Land Stewardship Centre of Canada
\protect\hyperlink{ref-LandStewardshipCentreofCanada2018}{2018}) that
the trees were providing to their local environment.

The trees may have been slowing the rate of water run off and preserving
soil structure. Now they are gone, the soil will be eroded faster and
the fertility of the land will be reduced. Further downstream, the
flood-risk is increased and the productivity of irrigation
infrastructure and a hydroelectric power project are reduced. These
trees are no longer absorbing carbon dioxide from the air and storing
the carbon in their biomass. If any of the timber is used as fuel, the
stored carbon will be returned to the atmosphere in the form of Carbon
Dioxide, so I have increased the atmospheric concentration of a
greenhouse gas that contributes to climate change.

Yet I have had to pay for none of the costs incurred by these damages. I
do not pay to stabilise the soil, or for flood damages to the local
village, or for the reduced productivity of farmland in the area. I
simply did not have to consider these costs when I was judging whether
it made economic sense for me to cut down the trees.

There are a number of underlying reasons why environmental and social
damages occur. Rational Choice Theory contends that it is because
economic agents\footnote{individuals and institutions that engage in
  economic activity} tend only to consider costs to themselves. Most, if
not all, such damages tend to be incurred upon third parties and so the
party causing the damage does not consider them. This was the case in my
(hypothetical) example in which I cut down the forest. The damage I
caused was suffered directly by others, so I didn't consider it.

It is also the case that many damages do not immediately manifest or
else are not plainly visible and so do not contribute to the knowledge
that informs economic value. However, William Forster Lloyd's famous
theory of the `tragedy of the commons' (Lloyd
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Lloyd1833}{1833}) suggests that even when
resource users know that their activities will contribute to collective
exploitation and are thus not in the common good, many independent
individual actors will continue to pursue their own self-interest.

The cost of raising and harvesting my trees, as well as the costs paid
by the distributors and consumers of the timber, are examples of
`private costs'. They are costs incurred by participants of economic
activity. We define the full cost of an activity, including damages
caused, as the `social cost' or `damage cost'. In the example above, the
social cost is the cost to the soil, the atmosphere, the fisheries, the
irrigation infrastructure, the hydroelectric project, flood security and
other attendant costs.

The difference between the two private costs and the social cost `the
costs that are left out of free market prices' are called `negative
externalities'. `Positive externalities' also exist where environmental
or social benefit is provided by activities but not accounted for in
prices. The benefit that a landowner gets from developments in nearby
infrastructure, public services or the general economy, is an example of
a positive externality \^{}{[}`Positive externalities' also exist where
environmental or social benefit is provided by activities but not
accounted for in prices. The benefit that a landowner gets from
developments in nearby infrastructure, public services or the general
economy, is an example of a positive externality \emph{received} by a
private agent. Private agents can also \emph{produce} positive
externalities. An example of this might be a beautiful building or a
cafe with charm and character.

This concept was first put forward by a British economist, Arthur Cecil
Pigou. In theory this makes for a very elegant and efficient solution to
the puzzle. In practice there is a little more complexity involved, but,
even so, Pigou certainly led us in the right direction towards
recognising and rectifying damages to the environment and society caused
by economic activity.

Pigou realised the tremendous implications of this discrepancy in
prices. All kinds of activities that appear at first to be profitable
might not really be profitable at all, once the full costs are included.
We are allowing private profit literally at the expense of others who
are damaged by such activity. This, he thought, is simply unacceptable.
Pigou then devised a relatively simple solution. All we have to do is
calculate the value of the `negative externality' and levy a tax of that
amount so that the private cost is equivalent to the social cost. This
is known as a Pigovian tax (Pigou
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Pigou1932}{1932}).

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}c@{}}
\toprule
\begin{minipage}[b]{0.97\columnwidth}\centering
\includegraphics{ChapterPictures/9-1-PigovianTax.png}\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.97\columnwidth}\centering
\emph{Figure 12.2 Pigovian tax - depicting social and private costs,
anda corrective tax}\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

In theory, this makes for a very elegant and efficient solution to the
puzzle. In practice,there is a little more complexity involved, but even
so, Pigou certainly led us in the right direction towards recognising
and rectifying damages to the environment and society caused by economic
activity.

\hypertarget{policy-options-for-tackling-social-and-environmental-damages}{%
\section{12.4 Policy Options for Tackling Social and Environmental
Damages}\label{policy-options-for-tackling-social-and-environmental-damages}}

Pigou was particularly concerned that any damages caused to the
environment or to people should be paid for. If we get prices right (so
that they reflect full social costs), this will in turn discourage
activities that would otherwise seem profitable despite causing external
damage.

The polluter pays principle is `the commonly accepted practice that
those who produce pollution should bear the costs of managing it to
prevent damage to human health or the environment' (Ward and Hicks
\protect\hyperlink{ref-GranthamResearchInstituteonclimatechangeandtheenvironment2014}{2014}).
This principle is the basis for most attitudes to the regulation of
environmental pollution, forming part of the broader set of guidelines
on the matter created in the 1992 Rio Declaration (United Nations
\protect\hyperlink{ref-UnitedNations1992}{1992}).

The issue of externalities is of particular relevance to the
conservation of natural resources and the environment. These resources -
the land, the animals, the air - are vital to continued high quality
human existence. If we strive to reflect the true costs of activities in
prices, and properly manage these damaging activities, we will quite
simply undermine the sustainability of the economy and our prosperity.

However, it's not all bad news. Successful policy initiatives have been
put in place to manage a variety of environmental and social issues -
from the 5 pence bag `Tax' to congestion charging in busy metropolitan
centres. However, these current policy initiatives are not sufficient to
tackle the large environmental problems and ensure our economies are
developing in a sustainable manner. The figure below illustrates what
has worked before, and areas for future development.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}c@{}}
\toprule
\includegraphics{OtherPictures/EnvironmentalInitiatives.png}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\emph{Figure 12.3 Successful Environmental Initiatives}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

Sustainable development as defined by the Brundtland report is
`development that meets the needs of the present without compromising
the ability of future generations to meet their own needs.'(Commission
on Environment \protect\hyperlink{ref-CommissiononEnvironment}{1987})
Unless we act now to create policy tools to properly account for and
manage environmental damage, it would definitely not be fair to future
generations.

\hypertarget{policy-options}{%
\subsection{Policy options}\label{policy-options}}

Pigouvian taxes are not the only weapons at our disposal to solve this
problem. There are a number of ways we could tackle negative
externalities to address social and environmental damages.

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  We could ban or regulate the activities that cause harm (`command and
  control');
\item
  We could directly or indirectly subsidise desirable behaviours;
\item
  We could create market-based instruments (MBIs) which placing an
  overall limit on the damage we will allow, and then distribute or sell
  tradable rights to contribute to the acceptable damage total
  (`cap-and-trade');
\item
  We could levy taxes to discourage harmful activities, as Pigou
  suggested.
\end{itemize}

\hypertarget{command-and-control}{%
\subsection{Command-and-Control}\label{command-and-control}}

The prohibition of ozone-damaging CFCs\footnote{Chlorofluorocarbons '
  compounds that, when released into the atmosphere, damage the ozone
  layer that protects humans and other organisms} against damaging
Ultraviolet (UV) light) in aerosols is an example of a successful
command and control policy. It was effective because it applied to a
specific production input (CFCs) that directly caused environmental
damage, and because alternative substances were available for
substitution. This latter quality meant there was minimal disruption to
existing production in terms of input cost, design and manufacturing and
other changes to supply. To put this another way, producers of aerosols
could easily replace CFCs with other ingredients.

However this kind of solution would not work with many other kinds of
environmental problems. The combination of direct application of
regulation to the damaging externality together with very contained and
predictable economic effects is unusual within the scope of
environmental externalities. While `command-and-control' solutions may
appear to be the simplest and most direct ways to prevent or restrict
damaging activities, the economic impacts tend to be complex and
difficult to predict and measure in advance. In some cases, restricting
one activity or product may simply cause it to be replaced with another
that is equally or even more damaging, meaning net social costs are
actually increased. In addition, regulatory mechanisms tend to be
expensive to administer, meet high resistance from vested interests, and
can be difficult to enforce. Stephen Shavell of Harvard University
(Shavell \protect\hyperlink{ref-Shavell2011}{2011}) presents a damning
summation:

\begin{quote}
\emph{Conventional regulatory policies, which have not accounted for
economic responses, have been excessively costly, ineffective, or even
counterproductive\ldots{} the `tragedy of the commons' might be better
described as the 'failure of commons regulation.}
\end{quote}

One possible way to reduce the effects of economic shocks of regulation
is to introduce restrictions incrementally or with delayed effect,
perhaps in conjunction with development subsidies. One can then observe
early economic effects and give industry the chance to adapt and
transition. Forward looking regulation can be extremely effective.

However, there are further reasons to seek alternatives to
command-and-control approaches. As World Bank economist Staphano Pagiola
and colleagues explain:

\begin{quote}
`\emph{while regulation can to some extent ensure basic compliance with
minimum environmental and social requirements (although enforcement is
usually far from perfect), use of positive incentives can unleash
creativity and entrepreneurship which can lead to results far beyond the
minimum.}' (Pagiola \protect\hyperlink{ref-Pagiola2002}{2002})
\end{quote}

\hypertarget{subsidies}{%
\subsection{Subsidies}\label{subsidies}}

Subsidies for innovation and development are an obvious choice to
generate positive incentives to protect the environment. As a widespread
approach however, this would not only see an untenable strain on public
finances, but would also represent an entirely backward logic. It would
involve using tax revenue from labour and other productive activity to
reduce damage that was inefficient or inappropriate to start with.

Our proposals operate in accordance with the `polluter pays' principle.
It is a core tenet of this book that there should be a direct financial
cost on damaging activities. This means that the burden for this damage
falls on those that are responsible for it. This would not be achieved
by a subsidy approach. We choose therefore not to include pure-subsidies
in our proposals, but we do consider a tax-subsidy hybrid later on in
this book.

\hypertarget{cap-and-trade-emissions-trading}{%
\subsection{Cap-and-Trade (Emissions
Trading)}\label{cap-and-trade-emissions-trading}}

There still remains an alternative to taxation not yet considered: the
emissions trading scheme or `cap and trade' system. We consider this in
the context of greenhouse gases. The current EU Emissions Trading Scheme
(ETS) is an example of a `cap-and-trade' system. It \emph{caps} the
total volume of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from installations and
aircraft operators responsible for around half of EU GHG emissions. It
then allows \emph{trading} by affected firms of emission allowances so
that the property rights to the collective total emissions are assigned
to their most economically efficient use (i.e.~the highest bidder). The
aim is that collective total emissions remain within the cap, and the
system acts as a least-cost mechanism to reduce emissions. If an
emitting company undertakes measures to reduce their emissions to a
level below their assigned portion of the amount permitted by the
overall cap, they may sell the excess allowance to other firms. In this
way, the market finds an appropriate `damage cost' for these emissions,
and incentivises technological advancement to find less polluting
alternatives to current business practices that are affected by the
scheme.

In theory this system works by assigning property rights to the ability
to `emit', and allows free trade amongst market participants to ensure
these property rights are allocated in the most efficient way along the
pareto frontier i.e.~where no party can have a utility increase without
decreasing the utility of another party. Simply put, people and firms
that have the greatest need or desire to emit purchase the greatest
number of permits from other economic actors who can reduce emissions or
find less polluting alternative business practices. In this simple
model, free exchange leads to a `pareto optimal division of goods'
(Allcott \protect\hyperlink{ref-Allcott2018}{2018}). In reality however,
the initial allocation of these property rights can often mean that
although the outcome is economically efficient, it is distributionally
unfair.

The effect is to reduce the production-damage to companies that find it
more costly to reduce emissions and to incentivise firms with a lower
marginal cost associated with emissions-reduction to decrease their
emissions more than it is required of them to do so.

However, in practice the EU's ETS has highlighted the many pitfalls in
this approach. In requiring international negotiations on the terms of
the scheme (to ensure that there is a large and diverse enough market to
make the system efficient), the ETS was watered down by lobby interests
to the point whereby it has been barely effective at all. The cost of
credits was too low to dramatically encourage decarbonisation, which was
helped by the fact that most were allocated free of charge instead of
being auctioned, and the overall base of the scheme covered only half of
European GHG emissions. Subsequent iterations of the ETS system have
improved on these issues, but it is a long, unwieldy process to fully
internalise these externalities.

\hypertarget{environmental-taxation}{%
\subsection{Environmental Taxation}\label{environmental-taxation}}

It is a core premise of this book we should tax unproductive and
damaging activities instead of those that are wealth-creating. We are
used to taxing goods, but we really should be taxing `bads'! If we do
this well, it is possible to reduce environmental and social
externalities in ways that improve on or overcome the crucial
shortcomings of command-and-control approaches, and also potentially
confer additional benefits.

Well-transitioned environmental taxes can achieve a system that is fair
to industry and consumers and that provides sound incentives, whilst
also covering the whole tax base.

We will explore this policy option in more detail in the section below
as, for reasons of efficiency, ease of application, and incentivising
potential technological developments, our proposals predominately focus
on environmental taxes.

\hypertarget{a-proposed-approach-to-reducing-bads}{%
\subsection{A Proposed Approach TO Reducing
Bads}\label{a-proposed-approach-to-reducing-bads}}

\hypertarget{taxing-negative-externalities}{%
\section{12.5 Taxing Negative
Externalities}\label{taxing-negative-externalities}}

As mentioned earlier, the concept of externalities was developed by
British economist Arthur Pigou, after whom the term `Pigouvian taxes'
was named. In simple terms, Pigou argued that the tax per unit of the
pollution should equal the damage cost of that unit of pollution
(assuming such a thing could be measured). Since the damage cost of a
unit of pollution might vary in the quantity of pollution, we should
clarify that this rate should normally be measured at the optimal
quantity of pollution (that optimum being when overall benefits-costs
are maximised). Once that tax had been imposed, the best allocation of
resources in an economy could then be provided by the free market (Pigou
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Pigou1932}{1932}).

A `marginal' cost is the cost increase in producing one additional unit
of a product, i.e.~in increasing the margin of production by one
increment. A marginal damage cost is therefore the cost associated with
the damage of producing one additional unit of the externality-causing
product. For example, in the case of carbon dioxide
(CO\textsubscript{2}) the marginal damage is the present value of future
(worldwide) damages from an extra ton of emissions, accounting for the
gradual uptake of CO\textsubscript{2} from the oceans and delayed
adjustment of temperatures to higher concentrations (Parry, Norregaard,
and Heine \protect\hyperlink{ref-Parry2012}{2012}). These taxes are
theoretically efficient solutions to environmental and social problems
because they manipulate price mechanisms in order to modify activities,
encouraging more efficient damage-reduction at a lower administrative
cost.

\hypertarget{calculating-damage-costs}{%
\subsection{Calculating Damage Costs}\label{calculating-damage-costs}}

It is notoriously difficult however to calculate damage costs, given
that this involves evaluating complex systems with multiple feedbacks,
predicting damages that have not yet happened, and including factors
that are difficult to quantify and measure such as psychological impacts
and aesthetic value. For example, to correctly tax a unit of
CO\textsubscript{2}, we must know precisely how a unit increase in
CO\textsubscript{2} emitted today would affect social welfare at
different points in the future (Pagiola
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Pagiola2002}{2002}). Yet the authors of a recent
IMF working paper argue that inefficiency due to inaccurate damage costs
may be overstated:

\begin{quote}
\emph{`Even if the tax is set at, say, 50 percent above or 50 percent
below marginal damages, a large portion (roughly three-quarters) of the
welfare gains from the true corrective tax are still achieved. Or put
another way, given inherent imprecision in externality measurement, a
tax that is 50 percent above or 50 percent below true marginal damages
may still perform reasonably well in terms of expected welfare gains.'}
(Parry, Norregaard, and Heine \protect\hyperlink{ref-Parry2012}{2012})
\end{quote}

According to the IMF therefore, the measure of damage doesn't have to be
exact for the Pigouvian tax to be effective. We will further discuss the
difficulties and implications of accurately calculating externalities
later in the chapter within the context of carbon taxes. First, we will
complete our introductory review of Pigouvian taxes as the preferable
means of internalising social costs, and explore criticisms they have
faced and their potential to contribute to a tax system that better
serves society and the environment.

\hypertarget{four-types-of-environmental-taxes}{%
\subsection{Four Types of Environmental
Taxes}\label{four-types-of-environmental-taxes}}

In the UK, environmental taxes raised £48.0 billion in revenue in 2017,
which as a percentage of GDP has remained fairly stable since the 1990s
- sitting at around 2.2\% to 2.8\% of national GDP. 40\% of these taxes
fall on households, rather than companies, with 66\% of household
expenditure on environmental taxes relating to energy taxes and fuel
duty. As for the corporations and services to which these taxes apply,
those with high energy usage and transport fuel needs faced the next
biggest tax burden. Such data indicates that clever and appropriate
targeting of tax bases, alongside appropriate use of revenue to mitigate
the regressive impacts of such taxes, is needed to ensure that these are
sustainable.

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics{ChapterPictures/11-EnvironmentalTaxRevenue.PNG}
\caption{Environmental Tax Revenue, ONS 2018}
\end{figure}

However, taxes on fossil fuels and carbon content remain a significant
proportion of these environmental taxes. OF the £48.0 billion raised,
around 3/4 of this was sourced from energy taxes. Such taxes are defined
as encompassing taxes on the production and use of energy products like
petrol, gas and diesel. The largest single element of the revenue raised
was from fuel duty, which applies to fossil fuels such as petrol and
diesel. These taxes raised 57\% of the total revenue from environmental
taxes in 2017.

Traditional views of environmental taxes are closely linked with climate
change. Applying regulatory restrictions to air pollution and greenhouse
gases have been the most prominent ways in which Pigouvian taxes have
been used. However, this perspective is highly limited, and the
versatility of such policies underestimated. Despite the beneficial
impacts from applying environmental taxes to carbon emissions, it must
be stated that there are a myriad of other externality targets to which
taxes can, and have, be applied.

Indeed, environmental taxes can be subdivided into four categories:
energy, transport, pollution and resources (ONS
\protect\hyperlink{ref-ONS2018}{2018}). Examples could include pollution
and resource regulation taxes, such as the the 1996 landfill tax. Since
the introduction of these taxes, the amount of biodegradable municipal
waste sent to landfill in the UK has decreased by 28 million tonnes to
7.7 million tonnes in 2017. Such a reduction can not only be linked to
the implementation of this landfill tax, as changing attitudes to
recycling or exporting waste may have also had an impact, but it is
clear to see that such taxes can have a significant impact on
non-climate related pollution. Moreover, the introduction of the 5 pence
bag tax in 2015 (DEFRA \protect\hyperlink{ref-DEFRA2018}{2018}) has seen
a reduction in plastic bag use by 22\% in the UK in two years. Nudge
theory would suggest that by forcing people to consider and internalise
the externality of taking another unnecessary bag, when on average each
UK individual was estimated as having around 40 plastic bags already at
home, this reduction was rapid and significant.

Such taxes could also be applied to other `social bads'. One pertinent
example for anyone living in London could be the example of congestion.
The city of London has been a pioneer in this area, applying several
different scales of congestion taxes to ensure that the city does not
being gridlocked, or increased in its levels of dangerous air pollution.
In combination with successful provision of affordable public transport,
the London congestion tax - introduced in 2003 - has seen a reduction in
congestion in central London by 26\% in 2006 from the 2002 levels
(Centre for Public Impact
\protect\hyperlink{ref-CentreforPublicImpact2016}{2016}). Other
tangential benefits included the reduction in accidents of around
40-70\% in the designated congestion zone, alongside the generation of
significant public revenues.

\hypertarget{addressing-inequity}{%
\section{12.6 Addressing Inequity}\label{addressing-inequity}}

It is clear then that there are a number of purposes to which
environmental taxes can be applied. We focus on carbon and fuel taxes
due to their double dividend of reducing the risk of climate change and
ability to raise significant public revenues. However, remembering that
the potential tax base of environmental taxes is broad can help us to
achieve a range of social objectives. Future examples may include things
like taxes on sugar, disposable plastics and other wasteful items that
degrade the environment and social well-being in the UK. Consideration
must be paid, however, to who faces the brunt of these efforts to
improve society, and how implementation of such taxes can be designed to
protect those least able to pay.

Pigouvian taxes have sometimes been criticised for being regressive
(disproportionately affecting the less-well-off) and exacerbating social
inequity. For example, a flat-rate tax in the United States on carbon
might appear to be unfair because data suggests that the percentage of
income going to fossil fuel consumption in the lowest decile of income
is 10.1\% versus 1.5\% in the highest decile (Shome, 1995). This is to
say that a greater proportion of poor people's income is spent on fossil
fuels than that of wealthy people. However, these figures may be
affected by the way income is calculated.

The effect of any specific environmental tax on lower-income households
might be evaluated by considering a combination of impacts;

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  The direct impact when the price of the taxed good rises and affects
  household expenditures
\item
  The indirect impact of price increases when taxed goods are used in
  production of other goods
\item
  The net impact given any improvement in the environment and its effect
  on welfare and given behavioural changes resulting from changes in the
  price of the taxed good (OECD \protect\hyperlink{ref-OECD2011}{2011})
\end{itemize}

\hypertarget{how-should-revenue-be-used}{%
\subsection{How should revenue be
used?}\label{how-should-revenue-be-used}}

Another important decision affecting the overall social benefit of
Pigouvian taxes concerns what should happen to the revenues that are
raised. If the tax is regressive, it may be seen as appropriate to use
some of the income to provide subsidies that protect low-income
households from price increases. However, the effect of this equates to
simply exempting some people from the tax who nonetheless contribute to
the externality. They are not, therefore, incentivised to change their
behaviour. This runs counter to the Pigouvian ideal because it reduces
the overall effectiveness of the tax. The Organisation for Economic
Co-Operation and Development (OECD), a major intergovernmental
organisation promoting trade and economic progress, advises that:

\begin{quote}
\emph{'Attempting to address both environmental issues and
distributional concerns within the tax itself risks undermining the
ability of the tax to do either. For example, an exemption for
low-income families from a tax on heating fuel eliminates the incentive
otherwise provided to economise on fuel use and to consider
alternatives\ldots{}}

\emph{\ldots{}Where there are significant negative impacts on, for
example, low-income people, these usually are better addressed by other
redistributive policy responses}'.
\end{quote}

Some welfare-enhancing options could be to allocate money to public
services, or invest in economic growth such that society as a whole is
better-off. Alternatively, we could make the tax revenue-neutral by
using the money raised to lower other kinds of taxes. This would have
the potential to address equity concerns. Economists have also discussed
how this kind of `revenue-recycling' could also make the economy work
better by reducing taxes that are damaging to production, thus leading
to a `double-dividend'.

\hypertarget{the-double-dividend}{%
\subsection{The `Double Dividend'}\label{the-double-dividend}}

Labour taxes are often criticised for their distortionary qualities
because, while central to government revenue, they effectively punish
people for working in that they reduce people's effective income and
their resultant welfare. Such taxes also affect the `work versus
leisure' judgements of individuals that are assumed to determine
people's willingness to work, and in turn impact the overall labour
supply. In increasing the marginal cost of labour, they can also have a
negative impact on employment. These issues were explored in the Core
Tax System chapter. Our concern here is to review the viability of using
such revenues from environmental taxes to reduce the impact of
distortionary taxes such as these.

Parthasrathi Shome of the International Monetary Fund argues that:

\begin{quote}
*`The attractiveness of garnering a double dividend, of reduced
environmental damage and revenue without social cost from environmental
taxes,should not be underestimated. Many estimates for the United States
suggest that the marginal welfare cost of taxation is about one third or
higher. Thus taxes such as carbon taxes which have relatively large tax
bases, could dramatically improve the efficiency with which revenues are
raised.'** (Parthasarathi Shome
\protect\hyperlink{ref-ParthasarathiShome}{1995})
\end{quote}

However others have argued that because environmental taxes tend to
raise the cost of producing output (thus reducing labour supply and
investment) they in fact may exacerbate the efficiency costs associated
with tax distortions in labour and capital markets. This means that that
the perceived efficiency benefits from revenue-recycling could be
outpaced (Pagiola \protect\hyperlink{ref-Pagiola2002}{2002}).It has been
suggested that if the negative tax-interaction effect does exceed the
positive effect of revenue-recycling, the real-world Pigouvian rate
should thus be set somewhat lower than its theoretical optimal in order
to compensate, making a tax both revenue and efficiency-neutral, but no
longer environmentally optimal (Bovenberg and Goulder
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Bovenberg2001}{2001})

One study assessed the potential for recycling revenues to reduce labour
taxes in order to reduce unemployment, and concluded that a positive
effect would depend on very special conditions, specifically that the
impact of the tax on after-tax profits is low (Boehringer et al.
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Boehringer2004}{2004}) Similarly, another
concluded that employment benefits would depend on the initial Pigouvian
tax rate being lower than the wage tax rate {[}Koskela, 1998{]}.

Ideally, the distorting effects of individual proposed taxes and the
potential of revenue recycling need to be properly evaluated before a
judgement can be made on a case-by-case basis. Doing so is complicated
by the difficulty of assessing deadweight losses.

\hypertarget{the-perfect-market-should-we-reduce-deadweight-loss-at-all-costs}{%
\subsection{The Perfect Market: Should We Reduce Deadweight Loss at All
Costs?}\label{the-perfect-market-should-we-reduce-deadweight-loss-at-all-costs}}

A market with no distortion whatsoever `a perfect market' is
theoretically created by the conditions of `perfect competition'. Taxes
and externalities both represent distortions that defy these conditions,
but there are other factors involved when attempting to evaluate net
distortion effects from a new tax.

Perfect competition (the market optimum) also relies on perfect
information (producers and consumers know prices and the benefit of
ownership), there being a large number of buyers and sellers, on no
firms having market power to set prices above marginal cost (whereby
they could raise prices without losing as many customers to competitors
as they should), and on factors of production being fully
internationally mobile. It also relies on the assumption that the
economic behaviour of individuals is perfectly rational, i.e.~people
always optimise the benefit they get from their transactions. It also
assumes that people are predictable. This is a core assumption of
`rational actor theory' that lies at the heart of neoclassical
economics. It is well beyond the scope of this chapter to critique this
theory, but it is sufficient to make two key remarks.

First, accurately assessing deadweight loss approaches impossibility
when given incomplete knowledge and multiple factors influencing net
distortion effects, more so when we can question whether or not some
factors are even theoretically predictable.

Second, and more importantly, to place the primary impetus on reducing
the absolute magnitude of deadweight losses incurred by taxation is to
assume both that perfect competition creates the welfare maximum across
society, and that any lessening of distortions from that ideal is
necessarily desirable. If that assumption were held consistently, it
would also follow that governments would levy no taxes on labour at all,
or indeed on any elastic factor of production (i.e.~factors for which a
change in price affects the level of supply or demand).

In this book we argue for a shift in the overall tax-base toward things
that are inelastic in both supply and demand, but not for the shrinkage
of the state -- because some level of redistribution is necessary to
provide an acceptable standard of welfare for all. Also, if we take the
example of a progressive tax that disproportionately affects the
better-off and redistributes benefits to the less-well-off, the overall
welfare gains to society may be increased even though the amount of
economic distortion has increased.

These points serve to demonstrate that the reduction of economic
distortions, including the deadweight loss of taxation, is only
desirable in so far as that reduction represents welfare gains to
society as a whole, most notably through redistribution benefits.

\hypertarget{health-and-food-taxes}{%
\section{12.7 Health and Food Taxes
\^{}\^{}}\label{health-and-food-taxes}}

Taxes on things that are harmful to individuals who are themselves
consuming the taxed entity are not the focus of this book. But they
clearly exist. There are high taxes on cigarettes and alcohol. There is
also a case for taxing unhealthy but cheap products such as sugar and
salt in manufactured food. It should be emphasized that this is intended
to

Health taxes can also be a significant benefit from the application of
environmental taxes. Taxing cigarettes for example has the dual benefit
of reducing pollution, both from disposed cigarette butts and packaging
as well as air pollution from tobacco smoke and its associated health
risks, as well as raising revenue for public services. These can include
`the polluter' paying for public health care, mitigating the increased
risks of financial burden which their risky behaviour puts onto the
state.

In general taxes are not the only part of the approach to reducing bads.
We suggest a TEAR approach `tearing down the old system before it
reduces us all to tears'.

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi})}
\item
  \textbf{T}ax the `Bad', this is a common and acceptable method
\item
  Widespread \textbf{E}ducation over a protracted period of the citizens
\item
  The citizenry reaching broad \textbf{A}greement, and finally if all
  else fails
\item
  Forced \textbf{R}estrictions and quotas on the `bad'
\end{enumerate}

In the following subsections we go through the main categories of health
bads as they are taxed at the moment and as we propose to change the
system

\hypertarget{alcohol-and-tobacco}{%
\subsection{Alcohol and Tobacco}\label{alcohol-and-tobacco}}

Alcohol and tobacco taxes would be retained as today. There may be a
case for harmonisation across Europe, to prevent `booze cruises'.

\hypertarget{sugar-and-salt-tax-on-processed-and-prepared-food}{%
\subsection{Sugar and Salt Tax on Processed and Prepared
Food}\label{sugar-and-salt-tax-on-processed-and-prepared-food}}

Excess sugar intake causes multiple health problems including obesity,
type-II diabetes and tooth decay. We propose a simple sugar tax on the
manufacture or importation of sugar based on three categories of
sugar-like compounds.

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  Class A: `sugar' (i.e., sucrose, glucose and fructose), including
  contents of fruit juice.
\item
  Class B: synthetic and natural sweeteners with unclear health impacts.
\item
  Class C: `unprocessed' sugars in raw fruit and vegetables; starch and
  other carbohydrates.
\item
  Class D: salt. We would take Class A would have 100\% tax (ie. £0.02
  or 2p per gram sugar); Class B, would be charged 50\% (ie. 1 pence per
  gram sugar sweetness-equivalent, but such sweeteners might be
  reclassified to class A or C with appropriate scientific evidence) and
  class C 0\%. Class D be charged according to salt content.
\end{itemize}

\hypertarget{red-meat}{%
\subsection{Red Meat}\label{red-meat}}

Red meat (e.g.~beef and lamb) causes \emph{both} health damage to those
who eat excessive quantites of it and significant greenhouse emissions,
in particular methane. It also involves significant land use (which
could be returned to forest). A straightforward way of taxing it would
be according to its estimated greenhouse gas emissions, according to the
same tax rate per CO2 equivalent as is propoposed below.\footnote{Technically,
  the Gloabl Warming Potential over 100 years}. The lifecycle emissions
per meat type and per gram of meat would need to be approximately
estimated. We are not explicitly taxing the health downsides of meat,
but the greenhouse gas emissions should also have a health benefit.

\hypertarget{wholesome-foods}{%
\subsection{Wholesome Foods}\label{wholesome-foods}}

A healthy diet includes plenty of fresh fruit and vegetables, pulses,
nuts and other sources of vegtable protein. It's essential that everyone
has access to low cost fresh wholesome foods. Therefore any additional
taxes on food should be used to encourasge and ensure easy availability
of healthy foods, especially in poorer areas. To eat well should be the
easy default option.

\hypertarget{a-green-tax-shift}{%
\section{12.8 A Green Tax Shift}\label{a-green-tax-shift}}

Now we move finally on to environmental taxes. We are proposing that a
broad suite of environmental taxes should represent a `green tax
shift'in the UK tax system, whereby increased taxes on resources to
internalise environmental and social damages can be accompanied by
reduced taxes on labour. This notion resonates with the ideas of Dutch
entrepreneur Eckart Wintzen for a 'value extracted tax', which taxes the
value that a certain product or raw material extracts from the
environment through human use (Van Kamp et al.
\protect\hyperlink{ref-VanKamp2003}{2003}). Wintzen proposed that such a
tax could form the basis of a new system that promoted services above
material goods. These ideas have become the basis of the Ex'Tax project,
which has explored how such measures might operate across the tax system
and provided a case study plan for implementing such a scheme in the
Netherlands (Groothuis \protect\hyperlink{ref-Groothuis2014}{2014}).

There is a potential issue with replacing labour taxes with
environmental taxes in the potential that this has to undermine the
stability of government revenue. If an environmental tax discourages a
certain kind of behaviour, that tends to reduce returns to the treasury.
If a tax rate is linked to damage costs under evolving circumstances and
shifting behaviour, it is dynamic and possibly more difficult to rely on
than is a levy on labour. Ex'Tax respond to this difficulty with
diversity, setting out a broad range of environmental taxes that
collectively help to secure stable revenues. Taxes on energy and natural
resources are relatively inelastic compared to labour taxes, which means
that there is room to increase the rates without causing a decrease in
government income.

Ex'Tax also point out that the assumption that labour is a reliable and
stable source of government income no longer holds as true as it once
did. We live in a globalising world in which jobs move across the globe,
and high rates of unemployment, ageing populations and increasing health
costs all weaken the stability of traditional labour tax revenues. This
reality is certainly applies to the UK (TUC
\protect\hyperlink{ref-TUC2017}{2017}) where the growth of insecure
employment is estimated to cost the Exchequer '£4bn a year. For the case
study in the Netherlands, the group outline a \$33.7b shift in the
national tax base from labour to natural resources and consumption.
Below is a summary of the measures they suggest:

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}ll@{}}
\toprule
\begin{minipage}[b]{0.47\columnwidth}\raggedright
\textbf{Decreases in Labour Taxes}\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{0.47\columnwidth}\raggedright
\textbf{Increases in Natural Resource \& Consumption Taxes}\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.47\columnwidth}\raggedright
Exemption threshold of '16,300 for income tax and employee national
insurance contributions\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.47\columnwidth}\raggedright
Flat VAT rate at 22\%\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.47\columnwidth}\raggedright
Allowances for the retired and unemployed/underemployed\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.47\columnwidth}\raggedright
Excise duties on fossil fuels (transport fuels including jet fuel,
natural gas)\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.47\columnwidth}\raggedright
Zero VAT rate for environmentally `best-practice products' and for
labour-intensive services\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.47\columnwidth}\raggedright
Tap and groundwater tax\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.47\columnwidth}\raggedright
\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.47\columnwidth}\raggedright
Electricity tax for large-scale consumers\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.47\columnwidth}\raggedright
\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.47\columnwidth}\raggedright
Deposit system for metals\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

\^{}\^{}\^{}\^{} Some more green taxes that could be imposed are
included below. For taxes that are hard to individually apply, it may be
possible to tax or rebate and increased corporate tax according to
progress at reducing these impacts. Please see the Corporations chapter
for more details on this.

\hypertarget{scarce-water}{%
\subsection{Scarce Water}\label{scarce-water}}

It seems apprpriate to tax the appropriation of scarce water resources.
This is particularly important in those areas short of water.

\hypertarget{endangered-fish}{%
\subsection{Endangered Fish}\label{endangered-fish}}

Some fish are endangered through overfishing. It's not enough to ensure
that fish are fished from sustainable markets, they must not be close
substitutes for those in unsustainable fisheries. Certain fish should be
banned althogether, others could be taxed if it is practicable,

\hypertarget{chemical-use-in-agriculture}{%
\subsection{Chemical Use in
Agriculture}\label{chemical-use-in-agriculture}}

Pesticides have been implicated in the reduction in insect numbers over
recent decades. What exactly is to blame is not completely known.
Nevertheless, the overuse of pesticides is of concern.

Fertilisers can cause direct greenhouse gas emissions. In addition the
runoff of fertilsers and animal waste can cause problems of
eutrophication in water.

Antibiotics are often used in animal husbandry. But overuse of
antibiotics threatens to create a new class of antibiotic-resitant
organisms.

\hypertarget{plastics-and-packaging}{%
\subsection{Plastics and Packaging}\label{plastics-and-packaging}}

Plastics can clog rivers and the seas. There should be an approach to
try to reduce packaging by a small tax not only on plastic bags but on
all forms of non-degradeable packaging..

\hypertarget{local-pollution}{%
\subsection{Local Pollution}\label{local-pollution}}

Additional local pollution can caused by fossil fuels such as coal, for
example SO2, soot (including PM10s), needs to be controlled by taxes or
tradable permits. A high carbon tax will pretty much eliminate coal
anyway.

\hypertarget{risk-charge}{%
\subsection{Risk CHARGE}\label{risk-charge}}

A more general problem is that risk is not taxed. I can give some
examples. Imagine a small oil exploration company drills in the arctic.
There's a spill which bankrupts the company. But the damages continue
and the company is no longer there to pay. Of consider a bank or a
nuclear power station. With the bank, and probably the nuclear plant,
there is a risk that the entity will create damages that will have to be
`bailed out' by the state. (In the case of nuclear, this is likely to be
much lower than the risk of climate change it mitigates, but the risk,
however small, still stands). With bamnks and the financial system there
is a clear sense in which during a financial criss, banks have been
bailed out by the taxpayer. There is perhaps a case for assessing risks,
especially those considered `uninsurable'. If there is an insurance
price available in the market, then this can give some sort of risk for
the chance of the state having to step in.

\hypertarget{focusing-tax-the-case-of-vehicle-emissions}{%
\section{12.9 Focusing Tax: The Case of Vehicle
Emissions}\label{focusing-tax-the-case-of-vehicle-emissions}}

The difficulties of assessing true damage costs have led to two common
adaptations to the original Pigouvian ideal.

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  The first is to use direct taxes that are aimed at meeting specific
  regulatory standards and priced according to abatement costs rather
  than set according to the full cost of the externality per-se. In
  theory this can provide a degree of choice to damaging agents to
  either pay the tax or (if it is better value) to reduce damages, or a
  combination of both. If the tax is set high enough, it will be an
  effective way to meet specific damage-reduction targets. There can be
  issues if the costs borne by agents are significantly unequal, which
  we will discuss later in the context of carbon taxes.
\item
  The second response has been for policymakers to impose consumption
  taxes on goods that are implicated in environmental damages, rather
  than directly taxing the sources of the externalities or targets that
  are commensurate with the damage (where damage increases in direct
  proportion to the amount of activity undertaken or product used). The
  issues with this approach are outlined this section using the example
  of fuel taxes.
\end{itemize}

The example of vehicle emissions highlights the importance of
recognising where multiple externalities are associated with a product
or activity and of assessing appropriate optimisation of tax
effectiveness.

Policies to reduce vehicle emissions provide a useful set of examples
for us to explore the question of where best to target taxes. Vehicles
arguably generate at least eight externalities.

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\tightlist
\item
  Vehicles emit carbon dioxide emissions, which contribute to the
  greenhouse effect.
\item
  Vehicles use petroleum products (petrol or diesel) which are imported
  (or use products which could be exported) from unstable and
  authoritarian countries. This is costly in financial and political
  terms and has security implications (Sallee, 2011)
\item
  Vehicles pollute the local air, harming people and the environment
\item
  Driving contributes to traffic congestion, which slows down other
  road-users.
\item
  Vehicle use increases risk of accidental injury to pedestrians,
  cyclists, animals, other motorists and accidental damage to property.
\item
  Driving wears down road surfaces and increases other infrastructure
  maintenance costs.
\item
  Roads use high-value land that could be used for other purposes.
\item
  The construction and maintenance of roads costs money that could
  otherwise be allocated elsewhere.
\end{enumerate}

These eight externalities, taken together, drive us towards some
conclusions on vehicle taxes.

Given that the first two externalities are directly proportional to the
volume of fuel consumed\footnote{assuming conventional petrol or diesel
  fuels; biofuels complicate the overall emissions flux} their ideal
Pigouvian solution is a fuel tax. Taxing fuel directly will discourage
its use leading to efficient reduction in those damages. Given that
emissions vary with fuel use (because they are also factors of engine
efficiency, road surface etc.), the optimal solution here is an
emissions tax,but that would be impractical given current technologies
(Anderson and Sallee \protect\hyperlink{ref-Anderson2011}{2011}).
However, a fuel tax still has an estimated two-thirds of the benefits of
an optimal tax on emissions (Fullerton and West
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Fullerton2000}{2000}).

Injury risk is a composite of a suite of factors including overall
mileage,average speed, weather conditions, prevalence of other
road-users, and safe driving technique. It therefore evades an optimal
tax, but is certainly correlated with overall vehicle use, so its
reduction is aligned with taxes that incentivise reduced vehicle use.
Infrastructure use and wear is optimally addressed with a mileage tax.
The current system of road tax is unfair because it charges all
road-users within the same tax-band evenly despite widely different
levels of road-use. The tax-band system itself is a form of tax on fuel
economy, which is intended to incentivise the use of more fuel-efficient
vehicles to reduce pollution effects. This is also flawed.

\hypertarget{fuel-taxes}{%
\subsection{Fuel Taxes}\label{fuel-taxes}}

Burning fossil fuels causes both global and local environmental
problems. In addition, burning oil products in cars causes health
problems and car travel is relatively dangerous. A tax on fuel is a way
of paying for those costs.

A fuel tax is a type of consumption tax, and consumption taxes can be
very effective at driving consumer behaviour whilst being efficient
Pigouvian taxes if a large proportion of the externalities tackled are
confined within a particular sector or product class. If an externality
has multiple sources `many ways in which the same kind of damages occur
across different types of activity' such a tax will not be optimal
unless it tackles all of those sources.

One important comparison is between fuel taxes and taxes on the cars
themselves according to fuel economy.

A US study of tax policy and fuel economy concluded that:

\begin{quote}
\emph{`Fuel economy taxation shares the weaknesses of fuel economy
regulation in that it induces a 'rebound effect' by lowering the cost of
driving, which erodes gasoline savings and increases congestion and
accident externalities\ldots{}}

\emph{\ldots{}while they do work to improve vehicle fuel economy,the
same goals could be achieved at a lower cost to society if policy makers
instead directly taxed fuel'} (Anderson and Sallee
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Anderson2011}{2011})
\end{quote}

The existing road tax with a band system based on engine capacity, plus
the existing vehicle excise duty (VED) with exemptions for low-emission
vehicles, are inefficient at reducing emissions and can cause rebound
effects. Replacing both with a fuel tax would retain universal
incentives to reduce vehicle use, (excepting electric vehicles, but they
would still be equally liable to pay congestion charges) increase
manufacturer incentives to improve fuel efficiency to meet consumer
demand, and create a more efficient system for emissions-reduction. But
would higher fuel taxes be accepted politically? A better option might
be to increase congestion charges.

\hypertarget{congestion-charges}{%
\subsection{Congestion Charges}\label{congestion-charges}}

Cars travelling at peak times take up limited road space and prevent
other car users from reaching their destination in a timely fashion.
Road fuel taxes can be seen as implicitly charging for congestion;
however, they do so highly imperfectly (because congestion and its cost
are concentrated very specific times and places which do not constitute
a large proportion of the fuel use)and so we suggest a separate
congestion charge.

Congestion is linked to overall vehicle use but is strongly focused on
busier times and locations, so a time- and place-based congestion
charge, such as has been introduced in London, is the most effective
practical solution. However, congestion charging would only be optimised
if it accounted for all times and places that congestion occurs,
imposing responsive per-mile tolls on congested roads, which may become
more feasible with future monitoring technology (Parry, Norregaard, and
Heine \protect\hyperlink{ref-Parry2012}{2012}).

We propose to adjust the existing (VED) to become a congestion charge.
This would work on a tax and rebate system. Everyone would pay the
charge but people would have the option to have a black box in their car
which would prove through acceleration, location or time that the driver
was not driving in a congested area. Every day that the vehicle was not
in congestion would be refunded from the overall tax.

We support per-mile congestion charges, once appropriate supportive
technology becomes available. In the meantime they should be rolled out
across cities and other major areas for congestion.

Since there are so many externalities associated with road vehicles, we
have considered road fuels separately. Now we consider the impacts of
fossil fuels producing carbon dioxide more generally.

\hypertarget{tackling-climate-change-a-carbon-tax}{%
\section{12.10 Tackling Climate Change: A Carbon
Tax}\label{tackling-climate-change-a-carbon-tax}}

There is an overwhelming consensus in the scientific community that
anthropogenic (human-created) GHG emissions are leading to increasing
global average temperatures through the greenhouse-effect. Atmospheric
CO\textsubscript{2} is by far the largest contributor to the rapid rate
of warming that must be stemmed rapidly if we are to avoid a suite of
climate-related issues.

\begin{quote}
`\emph{The most important anticipated consequences of climate change are
changes in precipitation, decreased snowpack, glacier melting, droughts
in mid to low latitudes, decreased cereal crop productivity at lower
latitudes, increased sea level, loss of islands and coastal
wetlands,increased flooding, greater storm intensity, species
extinction, and spread of infectious disease\ldots{} Estimates of
economic impacts of unrestrained climate change vary, with most falling
in the range of one to three percent of world GDP per year by the middle
of the current century (with large regional differences), assuming 4C
warming}' (Shavell \protect\hyperlink{ref-Shavell2011}{2011}).
\end{quote}

There is therefore a global imperative, including a strong economic
argument, for large systemic changes to our activities to meet these
challenges. Yet, even a staunch climate skeptic can find very good
reason to support a well-designed fiscal policy on carbon. Fossil fuels,
the primary source of current CO\textsubscript{2} emissions, are
non-renewable resources, so there is a need to transition to renewable
energy sources for medium to ensure long-term energy security. A
well-designed carbon plan can catalyse that transition and help to
incentivise the innovation and early-adoption of sustainable energy
technologies. Further to this, the approach we propose can lead to
significant welfare gains for every citizen because of the shift in
state revenues it can help to facilitate.

\hypertarget{the-difficulty-of-calculating-the-external-costs-of-carbon-emissions}{%
\subsection{The difficulty of calculating the external costs of Carbon
emissions}\label{the-difficulty-of-calculating-the-external-costs-of-carbon-emissions}}

Because of the sheer unpredictability of the integrated feedbacks
between the earth-system and social and economic responses, given
unprecedented climate change, compounded by the difficulties of
distributing the burden of spending along a projected future timeline,
the problem of estimating damage costs is found here at its zenith.
Estimations of the external costs of carbon emissions vary hugely and
find little consensus. For example, one study placed the cost of a ton
of CO\textsubscript{2} at over \$300 USD (Stern
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Stern2006a}{2006}) while another suggested a much
more modest tax of \$30 per ton of carbon, increasing to about \$85 USD
in 2050 (Nordhaus \protect\hyperlink{ref-Nordhaus2007}{2007}). Gregory
Mankiw, Professor of Economics at Harvard University, explains an
important quirk of the economics of projected costs:

\begin{quote}
`\emph{Suppose I were to tell you that some event 'it could be global
warming, or it could be a falling meteor ' is going to lower permanently
real GDP by 100 billion starting one century from now. How much would
you pay today to avoid that future event? The answer depends on how you
trade off dollars today against dollars in the future, which is measured
by the discount rate. At a discount rate of 1 percent per year, you
would be willing to pay 3.7 USD trillion today. At a discount rate of 5
percent per year, the answer is a mere \$15 billion. Plausible changes
in the rate of discount can easily change the answer by more than
100-fold. This simple numerical example goes to the heart of a difficult
problem: the issue of global warming involves taking costly actions
today to avoid adverse outcomes that will occur far in the future.
Economists have not yet figured out the best way to calibrate that
trade-off.}'(Mankiw, Weinzierl, and Yagan
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Mankiw2009}{2009})
\end{quote}

The models that economists build to simulate the social cost of carbon
(SCC) are known as `integrated assessment models' (IAMs). They combine a
climate science model, describing GHG emissions and their impact on
temperature, with an economic model, which includes projections of
abatement costs and a description of how changes in climate affect
output,consumption, and other economic variables. Many are not convinced
that these models are reliable. In a (2013) review of IAMs to date,
Robert Pindyck, MIT Professor of Economics, concluded that:

\begin{quote}
\emph{`The models are so deeply flawed as to be close to useless as
tools for policy analysis.'} (Pindyck
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Pindyck2013}{2013})
\end{quote}

\hypertarget{trying-a-different-approach-choosing-a-set-level-for-co2}{%
\subsection{\texorpdfstring{Trying a different approach: Choosing a set
level for
CO\textsubscript{2}}{Trying a different approach: Choosing a set level for CO2}}\label{trying-a-different-approach-choosing-a-set-level-for-co2}}

If we cannot rely on these models, how can we hope to get the price of a
carbon tax right? We need to bark up a different tree. Instead of
persisting with the impossible task of estimating CO\textsubscript{2}
damage costs, we should instead say that the marginal tax rate could
perhaps most feasibly be set to equal the marginal cost of reducing
CO\textsubscript{2} to a set level\footnote{Here we talk of
  CO\textsubscript{2} prices as a direct tax on the causes of emissions
  that also discourages the unsustainable extraction of high-carbon
  natural resources} as determined by reviewing national `carbon budget'
emissions targets as part of commitments to longer-term goals set in
multinational agreements under the Kyoto Protocol. So, instead of
attempting to evaluate the full costs of a complex system of damages and
feedbacks, we are then faced with a somewhat more manageable question of
the short-term cost of reducing net emissions to a more acceptable
level. This would be the first stage of an eventual transition to a
carbon-neutral economy, in which growth would induce zero net gain in
the atmospheric carbon pool. Depending on the time this takes, it may be
necessary to move to a position of net sequestration in order to bring
the desired stability to the climate.

The cost of reducing net CO\textsubscript{2} emission to a set level can
be approached from two angles. On the one hand are the costs of reducing
the current rate of human-caused emissions (abatement costs), and on the
other are the costs involved in increasing the rate at which atmospheric
carbon is captured and stored (sequestration costs). Consider for a
moment that we could calculate both the available sequestration capacity
and the marginal cost of additional sequestration. If we did this we
would know how much it would cost to capture an additional ton of carbon
from the atmosphere and store it such that it is not contributing to the
greenhouse effect. We could use this knowledge and this potential
capacity to increase sequestration to make an offer to
CO\textsubscript{2} emitters using the tax system. An emitter could
choose either to reduce their emissions to the required level (and incur
abatement costs), or to pay for the service of having the equivalent
carbon sequestered (pay the tax), or some combination of the two,
according to relative costs.

This would mean that whatever happens, the emissions target will be
reached, and the price attributed to carbon as a marginal damage cost is
accurately equated to the cost of negating the damage, i.e.~once the
target moves to zero net emissions the tax would be one-hundred percent
efficient at internalising the externality. However, it is obvious that
the feasibility of this policy is dependent on two key conditions.

\begin{itemize}
\item
  If the sequestration cost is too high, such that it completely exceeds
  emitters' abatement costs, the resulting high carbon tax rate could
  leave emitters with no option but to bear the full up-front costs of
  abatement. The economic shock of this would likely cause a lot of
  damage to production, including rendering firms bankrupt. Similarly,
  if the sequestration cost was much lower than most firms' abatement
  costs, there would be no incentive to decarbonise production and the
  concurrent benefits for promoting sustainable resource-use would be
  lost. This scenario is much less likely than the first for the
  foreseeable future.
\item
  There must be enough capacity for additional sequestration to meet the
  demand, otherwise the target would not be met or the carbon price
  would be inflated.\footnote{The scenario of a sequestration supply
    capacity that is both smaller than demand and cheap to provide, with
    appropriate supply: demand and abatement: sequestration cost ratios
    supporting only a moderate carbon price increase seems highly
    unlikely. Therefore, we assume supply must be able to meet demand}
  Therefore, the most feasible scenario in which this system would work
  would involve additional sequestration capacity that can be provided
  at an acceptable and relatively stable price.
\end{itemize}

There is considerable future promise for establishing sequestration
services which could allow us to set a carbon dioxide price that
reflects the cost of negating the emissions externality, and is not
simply based on guesswork regarding the damage costs.

\hypertarget{other-greenhouse-gases}{%
\subsection{Other Greenhouse Gases}\label{other-greenhouse-gases}}

We shoudl also consider greenhouse gases from sources other than the two
mentioned so far (carbon dioxide emissions from fuel combustion and
methane from red meat production). Cement production is an important
example. In addition, industrial processes sometimes produce non-CO2
greenhouse gases such as SF6, N2O and HFCs. The general rule is that we
need a greenhouse gas tax at a consitent rate

\#~12.11 The Urgency of Climate Change and the Transition \^{}\^{}

So how should we transition to a carbon tax? We deal with this question
on early, because, as we see, the design of our carbon tax is of crucial
importance to how fast we can decarbonise.

For a practical transition policy, we could implement a broad-based
carbon tax at a relatively moderate rate which increases with time.
There are several reasons for starting with a lower rate. First, it
would establish that there is a social cost of carbon, and that social
cost must be internalized in the prices that consumers and firms pay
(Pindyck \protect\hyperlink{ref-Pindyck2013}{2013}). Second, it gives
polluting firms time to adapt to abatement and develop new technologies
toward that end. Third, it allows us to monitor economic impacts more
gradually rather than introducing a large shock with unpredictable
consequences.

However, climate change is becoming increasingly urgent. Is there a more
creative way that can get change more rapidly? Perhaops this needs the
full force of both the public sector and the private sector. The
necessary role of the public sector (apart from taxes, which we will
come back to) is huge, but not fully in the scope of this book.\^{}{[}We
will limit ourselves to a few remarks.

Let's talk engineering first. The principle alternative energy sources
(renewable and nuclear) produce electricity rather than other energy
vectors. To meet our climate targets of limiting global temperature
rises to 1.5-2C above the pre-industrial requires a \emph{rapid} (two
decade) transition to emissions-free energy \emph{globally}. Therefore
producing \emph{enough} generation capacity quickly enough is the key
challenge. Let's talk about costs

For nuclear in particular, the costs are kept down and the speed
optimised when a standard design can be deployed and repeated many
times. Furthermore, both nuclear and renewables need low interest rates.
Government borrowing typically has such low interest rates, and so state
investment or a hybrid involving low borrowing costs seems optimal.

Tthe revenues of carbon taxes could be allocated to low carbon energy
such as renewables or nuclear. This is closely related to what we
suggest later in this section. {]} In addition to this role of the
public sector we also argue full force of the private sector to be
acting as quickly as is reasonably possible.

How is this possible? Not with just a small and slowly rising carbon
tax. For the private sector to come on board as rapidly we need very
strong financial incentives.

One option is subsidies rather than taxes. So called `feed-in tariffs'
have been used in the UK and other European countries to subsidise
low-carbon energy sources in the short term, but these are falling out
of favour because of their cost. Furthermore `feed in tarrifs' only
encourage new electricity capacity, they do nothing at all to discourage
dirty generation sources. So Germany, often described as a success story
due to its large proportion of renewable electricity, still burns
lignite (brown coal), the dirtiest of all energy sources.

But there are also problems with a large carbon tax. A major issue with
even a moderate carbon tax is that it will increase electricity prices.
The risk is that domstic and industrial customers will be paying
increased bills until renewable low-carbon energy sources become
cheaper.

Don't we actually want to make electricity \emph{cheaper}? Because the
whole economy needs energy and, assuming that we build lots of renewable
and nuclear capacity, we also need to transition cars, homes and
industry to use electricity rather than fossil fuels directly.

There is potential here to kill two birds with one stone. When we
introduce our carbon tax, we could also introduce an electricity
subsidy. This would mean that all producers would receive a subsidy
payment per unit of electricity produced. Those hit by the carbon tax,
the fossil-fuel power stations, would initially have some of those costs
mitigated,while low-carbon sources would receive the same subsidy for
electricity without having to pay the tax.

Thus output based subsidies, in the most important case,
electricity-output subsidies give the opportunity for a big incentive
for clean energy sources, without cost to the taxpayer and without
raising electricity bills in the short term. So, for example, a tax of
£200/tCO2 would raise the cost of gas electricity by around 8p/kWh. If
that was combined with an electricity subsidy of 6p/kWh, gas electricity
would be generated at a cost only 2p/kWh hjigher today. But just look at
the effect on rewewables and nuclear. They would be almost free, with a
subsidy of 8p/kWh covering almost their entire cost of production. And
coal would be eliminated entirely, because the net tax on coal would be
a crippling 18p/kWh.

Output based subsidies could be used in other sectors too. Consider
aluminimum. A tax on carbon inputs to aluminimum could be combined with
a subsidy on alumnimum production. But don't we want to tax aluminium
consumption too? Well yes, we could tax consumption as well as
production, at the same rate. In this case, exports would be exempted
from our carbon tax, and imports of aluminium included. What we have
then is the starting point to a border tax adjustment in order to
consitute a carbon tax based on economic \emph{consumption} rather than
\emph{production}.

\hypertarget{borders-and-competition-making-a-national-level-carbon-tax-feasible}{%
\section{12.12 Borders and Competition: Making a National-Level Carbon
Tax
Feasible}\label{borders-and-competition-making-a-national-level-carbon-tax-feasible}}

The UK already has a form of small carbon tax in place, called the
`carbon price floor', which was introduced in 2013, and is set as a
`top-up' tax on top of the European Union Emissions Trading System (EU
ETS)\footnote{(HMRC, July 2016)} (Grover, Shreedhar, and Zenghelis
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Grover2016}{2016}). However it does not apply to
all domestic production and, in particular, it does not apply to
imports. As Dieter Helm of the University of Oxford explains:

\begin{quote}
\emph{'The UK and EU targets are all based upon production and not
consumption. They therefore do not link in any clear way to the
CO\textsubscript{2} ppm {[}parts per million{]} concentrations at the
global level. Hence the abatement cost measures are not strictly carbon
ones\ldots{}}

\emph{\ldots{}it is possible to hit the domestic production targets
whilst at the same time increasing global emissions.'} (Helm and Tindall
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Helm2009}{2009})
\end{quote}

To be comprehensive and effective, then, a carbon tax must have a broad
tax-base. In other words,it should apply to many things rather than just
a few select areas. It also needs to actively incentivise
decarbonisation. The carbon emissions implicated in producing most of
the products we consume in this country occur in other jurisdictions,
because those products are imported. The UK runs a trade deficit, which
means we import more than we export. In 2015 we exported £284 billion
and imported £411 billion of goods.\footnote{ONS, 2016} A carbon tax
would ideally cover the emissions implicated in all of the goods we
produce as well as the goods we import. These CO\textsubscript{2}
emissions resulting from the production, transport and use of goods are
known as `embodied emissions'.

What would happen if we started taxing embodied emissions and increased
the rate of the carbon tax to better incentivise decarbonisation?

If we levy a moderate carbon tax on goods and services produced in the
UK as a standalone policy, it will negatively affect domestic
competition in international markets. We will have incorporated the
carbon externality into pricing, but other jurisdictions may not have,
or may have to differing amounts, so while our price is `right', the
global market price will be lower and UK firms will struggle to compete.

We could potentially avoid this issue by having a carbon tax based on
consumption, not production. If we do not impose the carbon tax on
things produced in this country, but we do impose a tax to reflect the
embodied carbon of things consumed here, there are fewer unfair negative
competition effects for UK firms. It would, however, drive competition
between both domestic and foreign firms that supply the UK market to
reduce embodied emissions and thus reduce the price to consumers. Taxing
UK consumption but not UK production would also be likely to drive
exports, which in turn would be good for our economic growth.

In an ideal world this would actually be doing things the wrong way
around. An `upstream' carbon tax, at the point of extraction,
refinement, or electricity production, is the most efficient tax base,
because the carbon stored in fossil fuels can be precisely quantified
and taxed without having to calculate embodied emissions. This would
also lead to savings in administration costs of the tax. A system of
rebates could incentivise the development of `downstream' emissions
capture technology (Parry, Norregaard, and Heine
\protect\hyperlink{ref-Parry2012}{2012}). The ideal for global
CO\textsubscript{2} emissions reduction is to arrange a global price for
carbon that is taxed upstream. International coordination toward this
end should be promoted.

However, for now we need to find an approach that works on a national
level. Because of the efficiency losses and generally high
administrational costs of downstream tax bases relative to upstream
bases, it is still desirable for us to impose a carbon tax on domestic
production in high-carbon industries, rather than taxing at the point of
consumption, but in order to negate the international competitive
effect, we would also need a subsidy on exports, which could simply be
arranged as a tax refund. Imports would need to be taxed based on
embodied carbon in order to correct for the domestic carbon tax. Systems
like this are known as `border tax adjustments' (BTAs).

In general we can separate two separate types of border tax adjustment.
One type, similar to the approach in output based subsidies above, would
provide taxes and rebates according to standardised quantities of the
major carbon-intensive commodities.

\hypertarget{border-tax-adjustments-feasible-and-legal}{%
\subsection{Border Tax Adjustments: Feasible and
Legal?}\label{border-tax-adjustments-feasible-and-legal}}

Concerns have been raised in discussions about the feasibility of these
policies. We address some of them here.

\hypertarget{complexity-and-administrational-cost}{%
\subsection{Complexity and Administrational
Cost}\label{complexity-and-administrational-cost}}

Our proposed BTA system is very simple in principle. The greatest
complexity comes in assessing the embodied carbon of imports. To do this
thoroughly would require consideration of the tax policies of all
countries exporting to the UK in order to assess the extent to which
embodied emissions of imports have already been taxed under other
jurisdictions. We suggest that this is indeed a messy affair and we
should instead tax imports according to the full embodied carbon cost,
regardless of the effect of policies of the exporting country. As more
exporting countries respond to the subsequent incentive to reduce
embodied emissions, the rates charged at our borders could be uniformly
decreased.

A fairer alternative system to this gradual rate reduction would be to
form mutual agreements with other nations that also impose a tax on
embodied emissions of imports, such that both sides refund these taxes
at the border. However, such an arrangement could be considered a
violation of international trade agreements because it would mean
offering preferential treatment to some trading partners but not others.

\hypertarget{wto-and-gatt-legality}{%
\subsection{WTO and GATT Legality}\label{wto-and-gatt-legality}}

The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) is multilateral
agreement between 128 countries (including the UK) on the terms of fair
international trade, and is regulated by the World Trade Organisation
(WTO). A detailed analysis by the German Federal Ministry for the
Environment found that in principle BTAs seem to be acceptable under
GATT, and it is permissible to impose a tariff on imports concurrent
with a subsidy on exports of comparable goods and services.

A central tenet of the agreements is that there is no policy
discrimination for imports based on country of origin, but the authors
argue that there are exceptions written into the agreement that might be
feasibly invoked with the justification of protecting the environment as
a global resource (Hilbert \protect\hyperlink{ref-Hilbert2009}{2009}).

\hypertarget{conclusions-to-the-chapter}{%
\section{12.13 Conclusions to the
Chapter}\label{conclusions-to-the-chapter}}

We've argued here for a suite of environmental taxes to tackle climate
change and a host of other issues faced by humanity. A carbon tax can
initially be rebated on electricity production, thus allowing a higher
rate and encouraginga more rapid switch to clean energy sources. Taxes
on other greenhouse gases, congestion charging, and other environmental
problems are crucial. Environmental taxes are also

\newpage

\hypertarget{part-14-conclusions}{%
\section{PART 14: CONCLUSIONS}\label{part-14-conclusions}}

\hypertarget{overview}{%
\section{14.1 Overview}\label{overview}}

In this book, we have compared the Tax and Welfare system to an
operating system - a mechanism of levers through which society is run,
funds are raised, and public services are delivered. Using this
metaphor, we have been able to troubleshoot the bugs in the current
system, and illustrate why the UK has seen increasing inequality of
outcomes between the best- and worst-off in our society, as well as
stagnation for the broad middle.

We have an unwieldy, overly complex tax and welfare system in which the
rich get progressively richer, while those on the bottom and in the
middle income classes see no improvement. For those in the bottom income
tiers, the system delivers benefits on a means-tested basis, and so
doesn't encourage re-entering employment. For those in the middle, rent
and mortgage payments have become an increasingly onerous burden - the
cost of simply having a home or flat to live in has become essentially a
kind of heavy private financial tax that has increasingly drained
ordinary families of much of their after-tax incomes.

Early on in this book, we outlined the framework with which we would
structure our evaluation of the UK tax system, by building on
Beveridge's work in fighting his ``Five Great Evils'' of society. In
accordance with Beveridge's programme, we argue for a tax system that is
fair and leads to greater equality of opportunity amongst its members.
It should be beneficial and contribute to the sustainable and ethical
development of society. Finally, such a system should be practical in
its administration and application.

Taxes, amongst their other roles of providing helpful behavioural
incentives (``nudges'') and redistributing income, are predominantly
aimed at financing public provision of goods and services - including
welfare for the most needy in society. We emphasise that these three
balls need to be balanced carefully, so as to ensure that a reformed UK
Tax and Welfare system can help us build the fair and prosperous society
that we aim to achieve.

We summarise the findings from our discussion below. Broadly, on the
whole, we propose to simplify the income tax and benefit system. We
propose taxation of `bads' to discourage negative behaviour where there
is a social outcome that needs to be achieved. A comprehensive Land
Value Tax (LVT) should be phased in, so as to ensure that land is
successfully developed and any excess rent will be captured by the
commons and the windfall redistributed.

Our proposals should be considered interim, since we have not yet
completed accurate modelling of all their effects.

\hypertarget{a-summary-of-recommendations}{%
\section{14.2 A SUMMARY OF
RECOMMENDATIONS}\label{a-summary-of-recommendations}}

We propose a simple tax system which aims to fulfils our requirements of
being beneficial, fair, and practical. These proposed policies, and the
related transitional arrangements, aim to resolve issues around
incentives and redistribution in the current UK tax system in a
politically achievable way.

\hypertarget{main-taxes}{%
\subsection{Main Taxes}\label{main-taxes}}

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\tightlist
\item
  Replace Business Rates and Council Tax with a norm-based LVT
  consisting of a 100\% Land Value Tax on increases in land rent.
  Transition the residual tax to a tax on land wealth.
\item
  Replace Corporation tax with a `Dyson' Tax (Cashflow Tax) with half
  deductibility for imports from VAT compliant non-tax havens.\\
\item
  Introduce a corporate wealth tax on the same principles as the Dyson
  tax.
\item
  Introduce a layered upstream consumption based Carbon Incentive.
  Transition this over time to an upstream consumption based Carbon Tax
  and distribute much of its revenues through a Citizen's Dividend.
\item
  Simplify Income Tax and National Insurance with a simple progressive
  income tax system with a very simple rate structure. (Definition of
  the exact details of the rate structure and basic income will depend
  on accurate modelling of the tax system.)
\end{enumerate}

\hypertarget{benefits}{%
\subsection{Benefits}\label{benefits}}

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\tightlist
\item
  Replace unemployment benefit with a payment by a results-conditional
  work-and-trade-school hybrid, not unlike Germany's `dual training'
  apprenticeships.
\item
  Slowly introduce a citizen's dividend as a compensating payment for
  additional consumption taxes.
\item
  Pay for housing benefit automatically out of LVT.
\item
  Retain other benefits, but fold all means-testing into the income tax
  system, with the maximum means-testing amount equal to the tax paid on
  the personal allowance.
\item
  Once this is achieved it will be straightforward to abolish all
  personal allowances and replace the whole system with a basic income
  with additional payments conditional on disability/carer/age status.
  Note that to avoid the basic income (declining in nominal real terms)
  someone would need to pay tax or do some other activity of value in
  order to achieve contribution records.
\end{enumerate}

\hypertarget{further-minor-taxes}{%
\subsection{Further minor taxes}\label{further-minor-taxes}}

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\tightlist
\item
  Introduce congestion charges in lieu of a carbon tax on transport
  fuels.
\item
  Introduce comprehensive environmental and health taxation (packaging
  tax, sugar tax, meat tax, and others if needed).
\item
  Increase the bank balance sheet tax, adapt it counter-cyclically, and
  adjust it to favour lending to real businesses.
\item
  Introduce a comprehensive wealth register. This may take the form of a
  disclosure requirement on all UK wealth owned by foreigners and on
  ownership of foreign wealth by UK residents. Combine this with a small
  0.1\% wealth tax on both of these classes of wealth.
\end{enumerate}

\hypertarget{transitional-questions}{%
\section{14.3 Transitional Questions}\label{transitional-questions}}

To ensure that these new proposals are implemented successfully, any
transition to the new taxation system would need to account for the
following three effects.

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi})}
\tightlist
\item
  First the transition must be \emph{practical} and \emph{simple} to
  understand.
\item
  Second the transition should be, and be seen to be, \emph{fair}.
\item
  Third the transition should be seen to be \emph{beneficial} in the
  short term as well as the long term.
\end{enumerate}

Asset value effects are important in this. These are important both from
the fairness perspective and from the perspective of economic benefit.
Volatile rises and falls in asset values are arguably unfair - rises
because the people who receive their benefits are not necessarily
deserving of them; and likewise for any falls. Both of these impacts can
be amplificed through ineffective application of government policy. For
example, two major government policies - not revaluing Council Taxes and
reductions in long term interest rates - have caused national house
price increases.

The following table shows both the final strategic objective and the
intermediate/transitional one.

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}lll@{}}
\toprule
\begin{minipage}[b]{0.20\columnwidth}\raggedright
\textbf{Policy Area}\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{0.36\columnwidth}\raggedright
\textbf{Initial, Intermediate Approach}\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[b]{0.36\columnwidth}\raggedright
\textbf{Final Objective}\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.20\columnwidth}\raggedright
Income Tax\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.36\columnwidth}\raggedright
Simplify rates structure, make existing benefits universal and add in
means testing using tax system instead of benefits means testing.\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.36\columnwidth}\raggedright
Income tax is only paid by the upper half of individuals\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.20\columnwidth}\raggedright
VAT\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.36\columnwidth}\raggedright
Remove Exemptions, SImplify\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.36\columnwidth}\raggedright
Transition to a profits tax based on UK sales\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.20\columnwidth}\raggedright
Carbon Tax\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.36\columnwidth}\raggedright
A system that gives general incentives based on a high implicit carbon
price that does not raise significant revenue\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.36\columnwidth}\raggedright
A high carbon tax used for general revenue\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.20\columnwidth}\raggedright
Money Balance Tax\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.36\columnwidth}\raggedright
No change from existing system\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.36\columnwidth}\raggedright
Electronic deposits are taxed at approximately 5\% per annum with a
significant tax free personal allowance. Cash are registered and are
time limited and a small fees are paid on withdraw\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.20\columnwidth}\raggedright
Citizen's Dividend\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.36\columnwidth}\raggedright
Use existing benefit rates that simplify the system and reduce
conditionality.\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.36\columnwidth}\raggedright
In the long term, build up a personal sovereign wealth fund to pay
individuals are larger citizen's dividend\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.20\columnwidth}\raggedright
Guaranteed Training and Employment\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.36\columnwidth}\raggedright
Short term, high quality master craftsman level courses for specific
groups to optimize the system\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.36\columnwidth}\raggedright
Long term, rolling out the guaranteed training to all sections of the
population\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\begin{minipage}[t]{0.20\columnwidth}\raggedright
\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.36\columnwidth}\raggedright
\strut
\end{minipage} & \begin{minipage}[t]{0.36\columnwidth}\raggedright
\strut
\end{minipage}\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

\hypertarget{concluding-remarks}{%
\section{14.4 CONCLUDING REMARKS}\label{concluding-remarks}}

With this book, we have tried to outline the purposes and principles
behind the UK tax and welfare system as it stands today, and we have
attempted to address where exactly it has been going wrong. Excessive
complexity, poorly communicated purposes, administrative and procedural
problems, and lack of public buy-in are all issues with the current
structure.

Throughout this book, we have shown how the flaws in this system have
played out into reality. None of this is about abstract principles; the
tax and welfare system deeply touches the lives of everyone in Britain.
Growing inequality, insufficient retraining or work-friendly support for
the unemployed, tax evasion and avoidance: We need to apply a simplified
and principled approach to fixing these mechanisms. By taxing revenue
sources in a simplified way, and by taxing unearned wealth so as to
lessen the distortive impacts of the tax system, we can help fight
inequality and build a better future. Through removing means-testing
from welfare provision, and supplying better support in helping people
back to work, we can ensure rewarding employment for all.

These are not pipe dreams. By making our voices heard at the highest
levels, and bringing these ideas into popular discourse, we hope to help
shift the dialogue away from the hyper-capitalistic rhetoric that has
loudly dominated for far too long. We want to make a society that is
more equitable, fairer, and less unstable than the one we have today. We
know our operating system; we know what we want to achieve; and we have
a toolkit at our disposal. It's up to us to learn how to use it properly
and justly to build a reinvigorated Britain that is both prosperous and
fair.

The tax and welfare systems are powerful tools by which to effect social
change. Use them properly, and we could see a society where housing
becomes affordable through application of a land value tax, our
environmental future is secured by requiring those who pollute to pay
for damage they cause, and the dignity of decent work for decent pay is
assured by supporting people into gainful, good employment by a state
that encourages and helps people to succeed in effective ways.

Above all, we emphasise the importance of the idea that any reforms
should follow the three principles we outlined at the top of this
chapter -- namely that any changes should be practical, beneficial, and
fair. Ensuring this happens is something that we consider to be a matter
of morality. It is also essential to the success of our reformist
agenda. These three criteria are linked to the achievement of political
acceptance. For the transition to be practically achievable and
politically feasible, it needs to be fair, and to be fair it needs to be
overarchingly beneficial.

Maintaining fairness as the front-and-centre principle in both the
transitional phase and in the long-term outcome will allow us to really
make substantial changes in the way the system operates. A just process,
with just effects, is our goal. We build on the Rawlsian ideas of
improving the welfare of the worst off, without sacrificing that of the
middle or the top. Change is possible with minimal harm, as long as we
combine clever policy design with clear communication about its
purposes.

A clear \emph{public understanding} of taxation as an essential
component of life in our society, as a useful tool for incentivising
companies to do the right thing, for protecting public goods, for
creating a fairer distribution of income and wealth, and for raising
revenue to protect those who most need it in society: This is the first
step towards change. We hope that this book has helped to communicate
this message, and perhaps will prove to have been among the first
pebbles thrown in what could be a landslide of movement toward a more
practical, beneficial, and fair tax and welfare system.

\hypertarget{bibliography}{%
\section*{BIBLIOGRAPHY}\label{bibliography}}
\addcontentsline{toc}{section}{BIBLIOGRAPHY}

\hypertarget{refs}{}
\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Adams2016}{}%
Adams, Martin. 2016. ``A New Model of the Economy, Brian Hodgkinson,''
\url{https://www.progress.org/articles/a-new-model-of-the-economy-by-brian-hodgkinson}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Allcott2018}{}%
Allcott, Hunt. 2018. ``Environmental Policy and Economics, Lecture 3.''
\url{https://ocw.mit.edu/courses/economics/14-42-environmental-policy-and-economics-spring-2011/lecture-notes/MIT14_42S11_lec03.pdf}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Anderson2011}{}%
Anderson, Soren T, and James M Sallee. 2011. ``Using Loopholes to Reveal
the Marginal Cost of Regulation: The Case of Fuel-Economy Standards.''
\emph{American Economic Review} 101 (4):1375--1409.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.101.4.1375}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-AntoniaMolloy2015}{}%
Antonia Molloy. 2015. ``A quarter of UK professionals are unhappy with
their work-life balance.'' \emph{The Independent}.
\url{http://www.independent.co.uk/news/business/news/a-quarter-of-uk-professionals-are-unhappy-with-their-work-life-balance-survey-finds-10071994.html}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Norton2011}{}%
Ariely, Dan, and Michael I. Norton. 2011. ``Building a Better America -
One Wealth Quintile at a Time.'' \emph{Perspectives on Psychological
Science} 6 (1):9--12. \url{https://doi.org/10.1177/1745691610393524}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Bakija2012}{}%
Bakija, Jon, Adam Cole, and Bradley T Heim. 2012. ``Jobs and Income
Growth of Top Earners and the Causes of Changing Income Inequality:
Evidence from U.S. Tax Return Data.''
\url{https://web.williams.edu/Economics/wp/BakijaColeHeimJobsIncomeGrowthTopEarners.pdf}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Barker2004}{}%
Barker, T., and P. Ekins. 2004. ``The Costs of Kyoto for the US
Economy.''

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-BasicIncomeEarthNetworkBIEN}{}%
Basic Income Earth Network (BIEN). n.d. ``How is Basic Income defined?''
\url{http://basicincome.org/basic-income/faq/}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Baumberg2012}{}%
Baumberg, Ben, Kate Bell, Declan Gaffney, Peter Taylor-Gooby, Paul
Spicker, Chris Goulden, Aaron Barbour, Stephen Iafrati, and Liz Yardley.
2012. ``Benefits Stigma in Britain.''
\href{http://www.nhslothian.scot.nhs.uk/YourRights/WelfareReform/Documents/Benefits\%20stigma\%20in\%20Britain.pdf}{http://www.nhslothian.scot.nhs.uk/YourRights/WelfareReform/Documents/Benefits stigma in Britain.pdf}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Bauwens2011}{}%
Bauwens, Michel. 2011. ``Successful examples of land value tax reforms
\textbar{} P2P Foundation.''
\url{https://blog.p2pfoundation.net/successfull-examples-of-land-value-tax-reforms/2011/02/05}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Beitler2010}{}%
Beitler, Daiana. 2010. ``Raising Revenue.'' Health Poverty Action.
\url{http://www.robinhoodtax.org/sites/default/files/Raising\%252520Revenue\%252520web.pdf}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Beveridge1942}{}%
Beveridge, William Henry. 1942. ``Social insurance and allied
services.'' Macmillan.
\url{https://www.sochealth.co.uk/national-health-service/public-health-and-wellbeing/beveridge-report}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-BirdAndOldman}{}%
Bird, Richard Miller, and Oliver Oldman, eds. 1990. \emph{Taxation in
developing countries}. John Hopkins University Press.
\url{http://library.wur.nl/WebQuery/clc/558274}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Boehringer2004}{}%
Boehringer, Christoph, Stefan Boeters, Michael Feil, Christoph
Boehringer, Stefan Boeters, and Michael Feil. 2004. ``Taxation and
Unemployment: An Applied General Equilibrium Approach.'' CESifo Group
Munich. \url{https://econpapers.repec.org/paper/cesceswps/_5f1272.htm}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Boles}{}%
Boles, Nicholas. 2011. ``It sounds bonkers but we should embrace a land
tax.''
\url{https://www.ft.com/content/29bf998e-e61c-11e0-960c-00144feabdc0}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Bovenberg2001}{}%
Bovenberg, A. Lans, and Lawrence Goulder. 2001. ``Environmental Taxation
and Regulation.'' Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
\url{https://doi.org/10.3386/w8458}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-SamBowman2013}{}%
Bowman, Sam. 2013. ``The ideal welfare system is a basic income.''
\url{https://www.adamsmith.org/blog/welfare-pensions/the-ideal-welfare-system-is-a-basic-income}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Bradford1977}{}%
Bradford, David F. 1977. ``Blueprints for Basic Tax Reform.''
\url{https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/tax-policy/Documents/Report-Blueprints-1977.pdf}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-CarersUK2014}{}%
Carers UK. 2014. ``Carers at Breaking Point.'' \emph{Carers UK}.
\href{http://www.carersuk.org/for-professionals/policy/policy-library/carers-at-breaking-point-report\%20https://www.carersuk.org/for-professionals/policy/policy-library/carers-at-breaking-point-report}{http://www.carersuk.org/for-professionals/policy/policy-library/carers-at-breaking-point-report https://www.carersuk.org/for-professionals/policy/policy-library/carers-at-breaking-point-report}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Carson1962}{}%
Carson, Rachel. 1962. \emph{Silent Spring}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Carter1966}{}%
Carter, Kenneth, A. Emile Beavais, S. M. (Eleanor) Milne, J. Harvey
Perry, Donald G. Grant, and Chas. E. S. Walls. 1966. ``Report of the
Royal Commission on Taxation.''
\href{http://publications.gc.ca/site/eng/search/search.html?st=1\&ssti=\&e=0\&f=0\&adoof=0\&ast=Royal+Commission+on+Taxation\&cnst=\%20http://worthwhile.typepad.com/files/carter1966-taxation_families.pdf}{http://publications.gc.ca/site/eng/search/search.html?st=1\&ssti=\&e=0\&f=0\&adoof=0\&ast=Royal+Commission+on+Taxation\&cnst= http://worthwhile.typepad.com/files/carter1966-taxation\_families.pdf}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-CentreforPublicImpact2016}{}%
Centre for Public Impact. 2016. ``London's congestion charge.''
\url{https://www.centreforpublicimpact.org/case-study/demand-management-for-roads-in-london/}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-CentreforSocialJustice2009}{}%
Centre for Social Justice. 2009. ``Dynamic Benefits: Towards welfare
that works - The Centre for Social Justice.''
\url{https://www.centreforsocialjustice.org.uk/library/dynamic-benefits-towards-welfare-works}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-ChildPovertyActionGroupb}{}%
Child Poverty Action Group. 2018a. ``Emma.'' \emph{Child Poverty Action
Group}. \url{http://www.cpag.org.uk/content/emma}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-ChildPovertyActionGroupa}{}%
---------. 2018b. ``Liam.'' \url{http://www.cpag.org.uk/content/liam}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-ChildPovertyActionGroup}{}%
---------. 2018c. ``Sarah.'' \emph{Child Poverty Action Group}.
\url{http://www.cpag.org.uk/content/sarah}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-CIPD2014}{}%
CIPD. 2014. ``Industrial Strategy and Future of Skills Policy.''
\url{https://www.cipd.co.uk/knowledge/work/skills/industrial-strategy-report}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-CIPD2016}{}%
---------. 2016. ``Employee Outlook Autumn 2016'' 2016:26.
\url{https://www.cipd.co.uk/Images/employee-outlook_2016-autumn_tcm18-16797.pdf}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-CommissiononEnvironment}{}%
Commission on Environment, World. 1987. ``Our Common Future: Report of
the World Commission on Environment and Development.''
\url{http://www.un-documents.net/our-common-future.pdf}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-HoC2017}{}%
Committee of Public Accounts. 2017. ``Collecting tax from high net worth
individuals.''
\url{https://publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201617/cmselect/cmpubacc/774/77405.htm}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Conservative2016}{}%
Conservative, Andrew Boff, Tom Copley, Labour Navin, and Shah Labour.
2016. ``Tax trial.''
\url{https://www.london.gov.uk/sites/default/files/final-draft-lvt-report_2.pdf}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Dabla-Norris2015}{}%
Dabla-Norris, Era, Kalpana Kochhar, Nujin Suphaphiphat, Frantisek Ricka,
and Evridiki Tsounta. 2015. ``Causes and Consequences of Income
Inequality: A Global Perspective.'' International Monetary Fund.
\url{https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/sdn/2015/sdn1513.pdf}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-DEFRA2018}{}%
DEFRA. 2018. ``Carrier bag charge: summary of data in England.''
\url{https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/carrier-bag-charge-summary-of-data-in-england}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-DeptForWorkAndPensions2015}{}%
Department for Work \& Pensions. 2015. ``Contracted-out health and
disability assessments.'' \emph{National Audit Office} 609.
\url{https://www.nao.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/01/Contracted-out-health-and-disability-assessments.pdf}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Dillard1904}{}%
Dillard, Irving. 1904. ``Mr. Justice Brandeis, great American; press...
\textbar{} Hathi Trust Digital Library.''
\url{https://catalog.hathitrust.org/Record/001142547}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-DorlingDaniel2007}{}%
Dorling, Daniel, Et.al. 2007. ``Poverty, Wealth and Place in Britain,
1968-2005.'' \url{https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-985X.2008.00561_5.x}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Dransfield2014}{}%
Dransfield, Sarah. 2014. ``Oxfam Media Briefing: A Tale of Two
Britains.'' March.
\href{http://policy-practice.oxfam.org.uk/publications/a-tale-of-two-britains-inequality-in-the-uk-314152\%20https://paperpile.com/c/XD9ymG/Ct6m}{http://policy-practice.oxfam.org.uk/publications/a-tale-of-two-britains-inequality-in-the-uk-314152 https://paperpile.com/c/XD9ymG/Ct6m}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Duffy}{}%
Duffy, Simon. 2016. ``Basic Income Plus.'' \emph{Centre for Welfare
Reform}.
\url{http://www.centreforwelfarereform.org/library/by-az/basic-income-plus.html}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Dye2009}{}%
Dye, Richard F, and Richard W England. 2009. \emph{Land Value Taxation:
Theory, Evidence, and Practice}. Lincoln Inst of Land Policy.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Dyson2015}{}%
Dyson, Richard. 2015. ``The chart that shows there are 12 rates of
income tax - Telegraph.''
\url{https://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/personalfinance/tax/11544301/The-chart-that-shows-there-are-12-rates-of-income-tax.html}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-evans2011reflections}{}%
Evans, Chris. 2011. ``Reflections on the Mirrlees Review: An
Australasian Perspective.'' \emph{Fiscal Studies} 32 (3). Wiley Online
Library:375--93.
\url{http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/journals/JATax/2012/4.pdf}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Fullfact2015}{}%
fact, Full. 2015. ``The welfare budget - Full Fact.''
\url{https://fullfact.org/economy/welfare-budget/}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-FullFact2019}{}%
---------. 2019.
\url{https://fullfact.org/economy/do-top-1-earners-pay-28-tax-burden/}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Fishwick2013}{}%
Fishwick, Carmen, and Carmen Fishwick and Guardian readers. 2013. ``What
it's really like living on benefits?''
\url{https://www.theguardian.com/news/blog/2013/apr/04/living-on-benefits-readers-panel\#comment-22483052}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Forget2011}{}%
Forget, Evelyn L. 2011. ``The Town With No Poverty: Using Health
Administration Data to Revisit Outcomes of a Canadian Guaranteed Annual
Income Field Experiment.'' \emph{Canadian Public Policy} 37 (3).
University of Toronto Press Incorporated:283--305.
\url{https://doi.org/10.3138/cpp.37.3.283}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-FredFoxton2016}{}%
Fred Foxton. 2016. ``Analysis of the UK labour market -estimates of
skills mismatch using measures of over and under education: 2015.''
\url{https://www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/peopleinwork/employmentandemployeetypes/articles/analysisoftheuklabourmarketestimatesofskillsmismatchusingmeasuresofoverandundereducation/2015\#main-points}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-FSA2009}{}%
FSA. 2009. ``The Turner Review A regulatory response to the global
banking crisis.''
\url{http://www.fsa.gov.uk/pubs/other/turner_review.pdf}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Fullerton2000}{}%
Fullerton, Don, and Sarah West. 2000. ``Tax and Subsidy Combinations for
the Control of Car Pollution.'' Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of
Economic Research. \url{https://doi.org/10.3386/w7774}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Gaffney1994}{}%
Gaffney, Mason. 1994. ``Land as a Distinctive Factor of Production.''
\url{http://ww.w.masongaffney.org/publications/C9Land_Distinctive_Factor.CV.pdf}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Gaffney2009}{}%
---------. 2009. ``The hidden taxable capacity of land: enough and to
spare.'' Edited by Francis K. Peddle. \emph{International Journal of
Social Economics} 36 (4). Emerald Group Publishing Limited:328--411.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1108/03068290910947930}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-George1879}{}%
George, Henry. 1879. \emph{Progress and Poverty}. Cosimo Inc.
\url{http://progressandpoverty.org/}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-George}{}%
---------. 1883. \emph{Social Problems}. 2006 Editi. Edinburgh: Dove
Scotland.
\href{http://www.dovescotland.org/socialproblems/socialProblems.pdf\%20https://ia800306.us.archive.org/4/items/socialproblems83geor/socialproblems83geor_bw.pdf}{http://www.dovescotland.org/socialproblems/socialProblems.pdf https://ia800306.us.archive.org/4/items/socialproblems83geor/socialproblems83geor\_bw.pdf}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Gilens2012}{}%
Gilens, Martin. 2012. ``Under the Influence.''
\url{http://bostonreview.net/forum/lead-essay-under-influence-martin-gilens}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Gilens2004}{}%
Gilens, Martin, Larry Bartels, Robert Shapiro, Theda Skocpol, Sidney
Verba, Marty Cohen, Jason Conwell, et al. 2004. ``Inequality and
Democratic Responsiveness: Who Gets What They Want from Government?*.''
\url{http://www.people.fas.harvard.edu/$/sim$iversen/PDFfiles/Gilens-IDR.pdf}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Giles2015}{}%
Giles, Chris. 2015. ``UK wealth inequality widens for first time in a
decade.''
\url{https://www.ft.com/content/1ad5c43a-a593-11e5-a91e-162b86790c58}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Glendinning2016}{}%
Glendinning, Simon. 2016. ``Derrida and the Philosophy of Law and
Justice.'' \emph{Law and Critique} 27 (2). Springer
Netherlands:187--203. \url{https://doi.org/10.1007/s10978-016-9183-2}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Groothuis2014}{}%
Groothuis, Femke. 2014. ``New era. New plan. Fiscal reforms for an
inclusive, circular economy. Case study the Netherlands.'' \emph{The
Ex'Tax Project}.
\url{http://www.ex-tax.com/files/4314/1693/7138/The_Extax_Project_New_Era_New_Plan_report.pdf}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Grover2016}{}%
Grover, David, Ganga Shreedhar, and Dimitri Zenghelis. 2016. ``The
competitiveness impact of a UK carbon price: what do the data say?''
\href{http://www.cccep.ac.uk\%20http://www.lse.ac.uk/grantham/}{http://www.cccep.ac.uk http://www.lse.ac.uk/grantham/}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Haber2011}{}%
Haber, Stephen, Stephen AA Haber is, Jeanne Welch Milligan Professor of
Po-litical Science, Helen Bing Senior Fellow, Aaron Berg, Ishan
Bhadkamkar, Nicole Bonoff, et al. 2011. ``Do Natural Resources Fuel
Authoritarianism? A Reappraisal of the Resource Curse.'' \emph{American
Political Science Review} 105 (1).
\url{https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003055410000584}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Haila2015}{}%
Haila, Anne. 2014. \emph{Urban land rent: Singapore as a property
state}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Hayek1944}{}%
Hayek, Friedrich A. von. 1944. \emph{The Road to Serfdom}. Routledge.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Hayward2005}{}%
Hayward, Tim. 2005. ``Thomas Pogge's Global Resources Dividend: a
critique and an alternative.'' \emph{Journal of Moral Philosophy}
23:317--32. \url{http://mpj.sagepub.com}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-HealthandSafetyExecutive2018}{}%
Health and Safety Executive. 2018. ``Statistics - Work related stress,
depression or anxiety.''
\url{http://www.hse.gov.uk/statistics/causdis/stress/}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Helm2009}{}%
Helm, Dieter, and Tom Tindall. 2009. ``The evolution of infrastructure
and utility ownership and its implications.'' \emph{Oxford Review of
Economic Policy} 25 (3):411--34.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1093/oxrep/grp025}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Henry2010}{}%
Henry, Ken. 2010. ``Future Tax System Review.'' The Treasury,
Commonwealth of Australia.
\url{http://taxreview.treasury.gov.au/content/Content.aspx?doc=html/home.htm}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Hilbert2009}{}%
Hilbert, J. 2009. ``Climate Change 07/2009: Border Tax Adjustments for
Additional Costs Engendered by Internal and EU Environmental Protection
Measures: Implementation Options and WTO Admissibility.''
\url{https://www.umweltbundesamt.de/sites/default/files/medien/publikation/long/3819.pdf}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-HMRC2015}{}%
HMRC. 2016.
\url{https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/corporation-tax-to-17-in-2020/corporation-tax-to-17-in-2020}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-HMRC2018b}{}%
---------. 2018. ``Tax avoidance schemes currently in the spotlight
(numbers 1 to 19).''
\url{https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/tax-avoidance-schemes-currently-in-the-spotlight}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-HMRC2019}{}%
---------. 2019a. ``HMRC tax receipts and National Insurance
contributions for the UK.''
\url{https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/hmrc-tax-and-nics-receipts-for-the-uk}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-HMRC2019a}{}%
---------. 2019b. ``Rates and allowances: Corporation Tax.''
\url{https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/rates-and-allowances-corporation-tax/rates-and-allowances-corporation-tax}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-HMRC}{}%
---------. n.d. ``Climate Change Levy - introduction.''
\href{http://customs.hmrc.gov.uk/channelsPortalWebApp/channelsPortalWebApp.portal?_nfpb=true\&_pageLabel=pageExcise_InfoGuides\&propertyType=document\&id=HMCE_CL_001174\#P1_34\%20http://customs.hmrc.gov.uk/channelsPortalWebApp/channelsPortalWebApp.portal?_nfpb=true\&_p}{http://customs.hmrc.gov.uk/channelsPortalWebApp/channelsPortalWebApp.portal?\_nfpb=true\&\_pageLabel=pageExcise\_InfoGuides\&propertyType=document\&id=HMCE\_CL\_001174\#P1\_34 http://customs.hmrc.gov.uk/channelsPortalWebApp/channelsPortalWebApp.portal?\_nfpb=true\&\_p}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Hood2017}{}%
Hood, Andrew, and Tom Waters. 2017. ``The impact of tax and benefit
reforms on household incomes IFS Briefing Note BN196.''
\url{http://www.nuffieldfoundation.org.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Houlder2017}{}%
Houlder, Vanessa. 2017. ``Fifteen ways to reduce your tax bill.''
\url{https://www.ft.com/content/bb8a6fa2-e651-11e6-893c-082c54a7f539}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-IFS2014}{}%
IFS. 2014. ``Living standards, poverty and inequality in the UK: 2014.''

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-IFS}{}%
---------. n.d. ``The Taxation of Land and Property'' 2009.
\url{https://www.ifs.org.uk/uploads/mirrleesreview/design/ch16.pdf}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-InvestorsinPeopleHQ2016}{}%
Investors In People. 2016. ``Job Exodus Trends 2016.''
\url{https://www.investorsinpeople.com/jobexodus2016}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-JacksonHoulder}{}%
Jackson, Gavin, and Vanessa Houlder. n.d. ``Riddle of UK's rising
corporation tax receipts.''
\url{https://www.ft.com/content/ca3e5bd2-2a7e-11e7-9ec8-168383da43b7}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Johansson2008}{}%
Johansson, Åsa, Chistopher Heady, Jens Arnold, Bert Brys, and Laura
Vartia. 2008. ``Taxation and Economic Growth,'' no. 620.
\url{https://doi.org/https://doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/241216205486}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Kalecki1937}{}%
Kalecki, Michal. 1937. ``A Theory of Commodity, Income and Capital
Taxation, 1937,'' \emph{Economic Journal} 47 (187). WileyRoyal Economic
Society:444. \url{https://doi.org/10.2307/2225357}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Keynes1930}{}%
Keynes, John Maynard. 1930. ``Economic Possibilities for our
Grandchildren.'' In \emph{Essays in Persuasion}, 358--73. June 1930.
Springer. \url{https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-349-59072-8_25}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Khan2016}{}%
Khan, Mehreen. 2016. ``UK facing `dreadful' wage stagnation: 3 charts
from the IFS.''
\url{https://www.ft.com/content/16662297-2067-3289-81bf-95da91628fbc}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Kogler2015}{}%
Kogler, Michael. 2015. ``On The Incidence of Bank Levies.''
\url{http://www.sbs.ox.ac.uk/sites/default/files/Business_Taxation/Events/conferences/2015/Doctoral_mtg_2015/kogler-paper.pdf}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-LandStewardshipCentreofCanada2018}{}%
Land Stewardship Centre of Canada. 2018. ``Ecological Goods and
Services.''
\url{http://www.landstewardship.org/ecological-goods-and-services/}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-LarryElliott2016}{}%
Larry Elliott. 2016. ``Why UK wages aren't growing in line with jobs.''
\url{https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics-blog/2016/feb/17/why-wages-arent-growing-in-line-with-jobs}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Lawton2013a}{}%
Lawton, Kayte, Howard Reed, Francesca Bastagli, John Cullinane, Howard
Glennerster, James Gregory, Horacio Levy, James Lloyd, Graham Stark, and
John Whiting. 2013. ``Property and Wealth Tax in the UK: The Context for
Reform.'' March. Institute for Public Policy Research.
\url{https://www.ippr.org/files/images/media/files/publication/2013/03/wealth-taxes-context_Mar2013_10503.pdf}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Lederman2002}{}%
Lederman, Daniel, Pablo Fajnzylber, and Norman Loayza. 2002.
``Inequality and Violent Crime.'' \emph{Journal of Law and Economics} 45
(1):1--40.
\url{http://siteresources.worldbank.org/DEC/Resources/Crime\%26Inequality.pdf}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Lee2005}{}%
Lee, Young, and Roger Gordon. 2005. \emph{Tax structure and economic
growth}. Vol. 89. \url{https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2004.07.002}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Lefmann2007}{}%
Lefmann, Ole. 2007. ``Course on Land Rights, Land Value Taxation and
Commons Rent.'' \url{http://course.earthrightsinstitute.org/?q=node/94}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Lister2011}{}%
Lister, Andrew. 2011. ``The 'Mirage' of Social Justice: Hayek Against
(and For) Rawls.'' \url{http://social-justice.politics.ox.ac.uk}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Lloyd2009}{}%
Lloyd, Toby. 2009. ``Don't Bet The House On It.'' \emph{Compass:
Direction for the Democratic Left}.
\url{http://www.andywightman.com/docs/Lloyd_toby_compass.pdf}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Lloyd1833}{}%
Lloyd, W. F. 1833. \emph{Two Lectures on the Checks to Population}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-LloydsBank2016}{}%
Lloyds Bank. 2016. ``Affordable Cities - Lloyds Banking Group plc.''
\url{http://www.lloydsbankinggroup.com/Media/Press-Releases/2016-press-releases/lloyds-bank/affordable-cities/}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Mankiw2009}{}%
Mankiw, NG, M Weinzierl, and D Yagan. 2009. ``Optimal taxation in theory
and practice.'' \url{http://www.nber.org/papers/w15071}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-marshall1890principles}{}%
Marshall, Alfred. 1890. ``Principles of Political Economy.''
\emph{Maxmillan, New York}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Martin}{}%
Martin, David. 2016. ``A New, Simple, Revenue Neutral Tax Code for
Business.'' \emph{Centre for Policy Studies}.
\url{http://www.cps.org.uk/files/reports/original/160304113651-ANewSimpleRevenueNeutralTaxCodeforBusiness.pdf}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Matthews}{}%
Matthews, Chris. 2015. ``Economic inequality and housing: There's a
connection \textbar{} Fortune.''
\url{http://fortune.com/2015/04/06/inequality-piketty/}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Matthews2016}{}%
---------. 2016. ``Paul Graham: Income Inequality is Necessary for
Economic Growth \textbar{} Fortune.''
\url{http://fortune.com/2016/01/05/income-inequality-entrepreneurs/}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Maxwell}{}%
Maxwell, Dominic, Anthony Vigor, Chris Powell, ) Chairman, Patel Chai,
Jeremy Hardie, Professor Kumar, et al. 2005. ``Time for Land Value
Tax?'' \emph{IPPR}.
\url{http://www.andywightman.com/docs/IPPR_Land_Value_Tax_full.pdf}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-McGuinness2016}{}%
McGuinness, Feargal. 2016. ``Income Inequality in the UK.'' House of
Commons Briefing Paper. UK Parliament.
\url{http://researchbriefings.parliament.uk/ResearchBriefing/Summary/CBP-7484\#fullreport}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Mclean2013}{}%
Mclean, Ian. 2013. ``The Case for Land Value Taxation \textbar{}
Compass.''
\url{https://www.compassonline.org.uk/publications/the-case-for-land-value-taxation/}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Meade1977}{}%
Meade, J.E. 1977. ``Structure and Reform of Direct Taxation.'' UK:
Institute of Fiscal Studies. \url{http://www.ifs.org.uk/docs/meade.pdf}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-MentalHealthFoundation2018}{}%
Mental Health Foundation. 2018. ``Work-life balance.''
\url{https://www.mentalhealth.org.uk/a-to-z/w/work-life-balance}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-BrianMerchant2015}{}%
Merchant, Brian. 2015. ``The Only State Where Everyone Gets Free
Money.'' \emph{Motherboard Vice}.
\href{https://motherboard.vice.com/read/only-state-free-money-alaska\%20https://motherboard.vice.com/en_us/article/jp5wdb/only-state-free-money-alaska}{https://motherboard.vice.com/read/only-state-free-money-alaska https://motherboard.vice.com/en\_us/article/jp5wdb/only-state-free-money-alaska}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-RachelMiddleton2015}{}%
Middleton, Rachel. 2015. ``Burnout Britain as long work hours culture
returns warns TUC.'' \emph{International Business Times}.
\href{http://www.ibtimes.co.uk/burnout-britain-long-work-hours-culture-returns-warns-tuc-1519158\%20https://www.ibtimes.co.uk/burnout-britain-long-work-hours-culture-returns-warns-tuc-1519158}{http://www.ibtimes.co.uk/burnout-britain-long-work-hours-culture-returns-warns-tuc-1519158 https://www.ibtimes.co.uk/burnout-britain-long-work-hours-culture-returns-warns-tuc-1519158}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-MilesCorak2011}{}%
Miles Corak. 2011. ``Inequality from Generation to Generation.''
\url{http://www.piketty.pse.ens.fr/files/Corak2011.pdf}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-mill1848principles}{}%
Mill, John Stuart. 1848. \emph{Principles of Political Economy:} Vol 1.
Wiley Online Library.
\url{http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/30107?msg=welcome_stranger}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Miller2017}{}%
Miller, Helen. 2017. ``What's been happening to corporation tax?''
\emph{IFS Briefing Notes}, May. ESRC Centre for the Microeconomic
Analysis of Public Policy (CPP) at IFS.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1920/BN.IFS.2017.BN0206}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Mirrlees2010d}{}%
Mirrlees, James A., Stuart Adam, Timothy Besley, Richard Blundell,
Stephen Bond, Robert Chote, Malcolm Gammie, Paul Johnson, Gareth Myles,
and Ames Poterba, eds. 2010. \emph{Dimensions of tax design: the
Mirrlees review}. \url{http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/33690/}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Mirrlees2011}{}%
Mirrlees, James A., Timothy Besley, Richard Blundell, Stephen Bond,
Robert Chote, Malcolm Gammie, Paul Johnson, Gareth Myles, and James
Poterba. 2011. \emph{Tax by Design: The Mirrlees Review}. Vol. i.
\href{http://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/5353\%20http://www.ifs.org.uk/mirrleesReview/design}{http://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/5353 http://www.ifs.org.uk/mirrleesReview/design}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Mirrlees2010}{}%
Mirrlees, James, and IFS. 2010. ``Mirrlees Review - Institute for Fiscal
Studies - IFS.''
\url{https://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/mirrleesreview/}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Mitchell}{}%
Mitchell, Stephen R, and Anthony J M Vickers. 2003. ``The Impact of the
Jubilee Line Extension of the London Underground Rail Network on Land
Values.''
\url{http://www.andywightman.com/docs/Mitchell_Vickers_Jubilee.pdf}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-DeMooij2016}{}%
Mooij, Ruud de, Michael Tieman, and Alexander Keen. 2016. ``Fixing the
Great Distortion: How to Undo the Tax Bias Toward Debt Finance
\textbar{} IMF Blog.''
\url{https://blogs.imf.org/2016/11/10/fixing-the-great-distortion-how-to-undo-the-tax-bias-toward-debt-finance/}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Mulgan1993}{}%
Mulgan, Geoff, and Robin Murray. 1993. ``How to make paying taxes more
palatable.''
\url{https://www.independent.co.uk/voices/leading-article-how-to-make-paying-taxes-more-palatable-1491568.html}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-NAO2017}{}%
NAO. 2017. ``HM Revenue \& Customs 2016-17 Accounts: Report by the
Comptroller and Auditor General.''
\url{https://www.nao.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2017/07/HM-Revenue-Customs-2016-17-Accounts-Report-by-the-Comptroller-and-Auditor-General.pdf}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-NationalAuditOffice2018}{}%
National Audit Office. 2018. ``Rolling out Universal Credit.''
\url{https://www.nao.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/Rolling-out-Universal-Credit-Summary.pdf}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-NewEconomicFoundation2009}{}%
New Economic Foundation. 2009. ``A bit rich \textbar{}.''
\url{http://neweconomics.org/2009/12/a-bit-rich/}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Nordhaus2007}{}%
Nordhaus, William D. 2007. ``To Tax or Not to Tax: Alternative
Approaches to Slowing Global Warming.'' \emph{Rev Environ Econ Policy} 1
(1):26--44. \url{https://doi.org/10.1093/reep/rem008}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Norris2016}{}%
Norris, Emma. 2016. ``What next for Universal Credit? \textbar{} The
Institute for Government.''
\url{https://www.instituteforgovernment.org.uk/blog/what-next-universal-credit}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-OECD2011}{}%
OECD. 2011. ``Towards green growth.''
\url{https://www.oecd.org/greengrowth/48012345.pdf}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-OE2014}{}%
---------. 2014. ``Does income inequality hurt economic growth?''
\url{https://www.oecd.org/social/Focus-Inequality-and-Growth-2014.pdf}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-OECD2015}{}%
---------. 2015. \emph{In It Together: Why Less Inequality Benefits
All}. OECD Publishing. \url{https://doi.org/10.1787/9789264235120-en}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-OBR2018}{}%
Office for Budget Responsibility. 2018. ``An OBR Guide to Welfare
Spending.''
\url{http://obr.uk/forecasts-in-depth/brief-guides-and-explainers/an-obr-guide-to-welfare-spending/}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-ONS2015}{}%
ONS. 2015a. ``Chapter 2: Total wealth, Wealth in Great Britain, 2012 to
2014 - ONS.''
\url{http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20160105170657/http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/was/wealth-in-great-britain-wave-4/2012-2014/rpt-chapter-2.html}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-ONSWELLBEING2015}{}%
---------. 2015b. ``Economic Well-being, Quarter 3 July to Sept 2015 -
ONS.''
\url{http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20160105170633/http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/naa1-rd/economic-well-being/q3-2015/stb.html\#tab-Wealth}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-ONS2016a}{}%
---------. 2016a. ``Housing summary measures analysis - Office for
National Statistics.''
\url{https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/housing/articles/housingsummarymeasuresanalysis/2015\#affordability-of-home-ownership}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-ONS2016c}{}%
---------. 2016b. ``Income related benefits.'' Department of Work \&
Pensions.
\url{https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/535362/ir-benefits-take-up-main-report-2014-15.pdf}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-ONS2016b}{}%
---------. 2016c. ``UK labour market statistics: July 2016 - Office for
National Statistics.''
\url{https://www.ons.gov.uk/releases/uklabourmarketstatisticsjuly2016}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-ONS2018}{}%
---------. 2018. ``Five facts about environmental taxes.''
\url{https://www.ons.gov.uk/economy/environmentalaccounts/articles/fivefactsaboutenvironmentaltaxes/2018-10-09}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-ONS2019}{}%
---------. 2019. ``Gross Domestic Product: chained volume measures:
Seasonally adjusted £m - Office for National Statistics.''
\url{https://www.ons.gov.uk/economy/grossdomesticproductgdp/timeseries/abmi/qna}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Ough2016}{}%
Ough, Tom. 2016. ``The state of the UK housing market in five charts.''
\url{https://www.telegraph.co.uk/property/house-prices/the-state-of-the-uk-housing-market-in-five-charts/}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-OurWorldinData2018}{}%
Our World in Data. 2018. ``Why is carbon pricing in some countries more
successful than in others?''
\url{https://ourworldindata.org/carbon-pricing-popular}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Pagiola2002}{}%
Pagiola, S. 2002. \emph{Paying for water services in Central America:
Learning from Costa Rica}. Earthscan.
\url{http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTEEI/214574-1112740068165/22251637/CostaRica09-LandUseChange.pdf}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Parry2012}{}%
Parry, Ian W H, John Norregaard, and Dirk Heine. 2012. ``Environmental
Tax Reform: Principles from Theory and Practice to Date.'' \emph{Fiscal
Affairs Department, International Monetary Fund}.
\url{https://gargantua.polytechnique.fr/siatel-web/linkto/mICYYYS8u9Y}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-ParthasarathiShome}{}%
Parthasarathi Shome. 1995. ``Tax Administration and the Small
Taxpayer.''
\url{http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/pdp/2004/pdp02.pdf}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Piff2010}{}%
Piff, Paul K, Michael W Kraus, Stéphane Côté, Bonnie Hayden Cheng, and
Dacher Keltner. 2010. ``Having Less, Giving More: The Influence of
Social Class on Prosocial Behavior.'' \emph{Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology} 99:771--84. \url{https://doi.org/10.1037/a0020092}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Pigou1932}{}%
Pigou, A. C. 1932. ``The economics of welfare.'' \emph{Basingstolce:
Macmillan}, 29--30.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Pigou1924}{}%
Pigou, Arthur Cecil. 1924. \emph{The Economics of Welfare}. Basingstoke:
Macmillan.
\url{http://www.econlib.org/library/NPDBooks/Pigou/pgEW.html}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Piketty2014a}{}%
Piketty, T. 2014. \emph{Capital in the Twenty-first Century}. Harvard
University Press.
\url{http://www.hup.harvard.edu/catalog.php?isbn=9780674430006}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Pindyck2013}{}%
Pindyck, Robert. 2013. ``Climate Change Policy: What Do the Models Tell
Us?'' Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.
\url{https://doi.org/10.3386/w19244}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Ploeg2011}{}%
Ploeg, Frederick van der. 2011. ``Natural Resources: Curse or
Blessing?'' \emph{Journal of Economic Literature} 49 (2):366--420.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1257/jel.49.2.366}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Pogge1998}{}%
Pogge, Thomas. 1998. ``A global resources dividend.'' In \emph{Ethics of
Consumption: The Good Life, Justice, and Global Stewardship}, edited by
David A. Crocker and Toby Linden.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Putland2013}{}%
Putland, Gavin R. 2013. ``Ramsey taxation means land-value taxation.''
\url{http://www.grputland.com/2013/10/ramsey-taxation-means-land-value.html}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-PWC2015}{}%
PWC. 2015. ``Total Tax Contribution of UK Financial Services Eighth
Edition.'' \emph{City of London Corporation}.
\url{www.cityoflondon.gov.uk/economicresearch}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-PWC2017}{}%
---------. 2017. ``Public prepared to pay more tax for a better NHS,
according to post-election consumer poll launched at Confed17 - PwC.''
\url{https://www.pwc.co.uk/press-room/press-releases/public-prepared-to-pay-more-tax-for-a-better-nhs.html}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Ramsey1927}{}%
Ramsey, F. P. 1927. ``A Contribution to the Theory of Taxation.''
\emph{The Economic Journal} 37 (145):47--61.
\url{http://www.uib.cat/depart/deaweb/webpersonal/amedeospadaro/workingpapers/bibliosecpub/ramsey.pdf}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-ReinhartCamenM.andKennethS.RogoffReinhart2010}{}%
Reinhart, Camen M. and Kenneth S. RogoffReinhart, Camen M., and Kenneth
S. Rogoff. 2010. ``From Financial Crash to Debt Crisis.'' \emph{NBER
Working Paper}, no. 15795.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-ricardo1821principles}{}%
Ricardo, David. 1821. \emph{On the Principles of Political Economy and
Taxation}. Kessinger Publishing.
\url{http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/33310}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-RichardClegg2016}{}%
Richard Clegg. 2016. ``UK Labour Market July 2016.''
\href{file:///C:/Users/dell/Downloads/UK\%20Labour\%20Market\%20July\%202016.pdf}{file:///C:/Users/dell/Downloads/UK Labour Market July 2016.pdf}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Riley2001}{}%
Riley, Don, and Centre for Land Policy Studies. 2001. \emph{Taken for a
ride : taxpayers, trains and HM treasury}. Centre for Land Policy
Studies.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-romero2004}{}%
Romero, Ana Maria. 2004. ``The Park Place Economist: The Positive
Externalities of Historic District Designation The Positive
Externalities of Historic District Designation The Positive
Externalities of Historic District Designation'' 12 (12).
\url{http://digitalcommons.iwu.edu/parkplace/vol12/iss1/16}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-RSA2015}{}%
RSA. 2015. ``The principled and pragmatic case for Universal Basic
Income.''
\url{https://www.thersa.org/about-us/media/2015/the-principled-and-pragmatic-case-for-a-universal-basic-income--new-report}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-BertrandRussell1918}{}%
Russell, Bertrand. 1918. \emph{Proposed Roads to Freedom: Socialism,
Anarchism and Syndicalism.} Cosimo Classics.
\url{http://pinkmonkey.com/dl/library1/digi311.pdf}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Rypkema1992a}{}%
Rypkema, D D. 1992. ``Past meets Future: Saving America's Historic
Environments.'' \emph{The Preservation Press}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Salmon2005}{}%
Salmon, Helen. 2005. ``Common Theft.''
\url{http://socialistreview.org.uk/302/common-theft}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-SarahBoseley2015}{}%
Sarah Boseley. 2015. ``Working longer hours increases stroke risk.''
\emph{The Guardian}.
\url{https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/aug/20/working-longer-hours-increases-stroke-risk}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Segal2012}{}%
Segal, Paul, Segal, and Paul. 2012. \emph{Energy policy the
international journal of the political, economic, planning,
environmental and social aspects of energy.} Vol. 51. C. Elsevier
Science.
\url{https://econpapers.repec.org/article/eeeenepol/v_3a51_3ay_3a2012_3ai_3ac_3ap_3a340-348.htm}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Shavell2011}{}%
Shavell, Steven. 2011. ``Corrective Taxation versus Liability.''
\emph{American Economic Review: Papers \& Proceedings} 101 (3):273--76.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.101.3.273}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Shaxson2011}{}%
Shaxson, Nicholas. 2011. \emph{Treasure Islands}.
\url{http://treasureislands.org/}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Shaxson2016}{}%
Shaxson, Nick. 2016. ``Which countries have a Land Value Tax? - Tax
Justice Network.''
\url{https://www.taxjustice.net/2016/02/25/which-countries-have-a-land-value-tax/}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Shelter2010}{}%
Shelter. 2010. ``The human cost.''
\url{http://england.shelter.org.uk/__data/assets/pdf_file/0003/268752/The_Human_Cost.pdf}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-ShelterEngland2016}{}%
Shelter England. 2016.
\url{http://england.shelter.org.uk/media/press_releases/articles/44_of_working_families_cut_back_on_essential_food_and_clothing_to_pay_for_their_home,_new_figures_from_shelter_show}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Shwarz1951}{}%
Shwarz, Fritz. 1951. ``The Experiment in Worgl.''
\url{https://www.hanseisenkolb.de/woergl.htm}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Skidelsky2013}{}%
Skidelsky, Robert. 2013. \emph{How Much Is Enough?: Money and the Good
Life}. Penguin.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-smith1776wealth}{}%
Smith, Adam. 1776. \emph{The Wealth of Nations}. Wiley Online Library.
\url{http://www.gutenberg.org/files/3300/3300-h/3300-h.htm}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Standing2017}{}%
Standing, Guy. 2017. ``India's Experiment in Basic Income Grants.''
\emph{Global Dialogue} 7 (4).
\url{http://isa-global-dialogue.net/indias-great-experiment-the-transformative-potential-of-basic-income-grants/}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-StatisticsCanada2018}{}%
Statistics Canada. 2018. ``Low income cut-offs.''
\url{http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/75f0002m/2009002/s2-eng.htm}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Stellar2012}{}%
Stellar, Jennifer E., Vida M. Manzo, Michael W. Kraus, and Dacher
Keltner. 2012. ``Class and compassion: Socioeconomic factors predict
responses to suffering.'' \emph{Emotion} 12 (3):449--59.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1037/a0026508}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Stern2006a}{}%
Stern, N. H. 2006. \emph{Stern Review on the Economics of Climate
Change}. Cambridge University Press.
\url{http://www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/sternreview_index.htm}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-SullivanCromwellLLP2011}{}%
Sullivan \& Cromwell LLP. 2011. ``Bank Levies in the UK, France and
Germany: A comparison of the new Levies on Banks.'' \emph{SULLIVAN \&
CROMWELL LLP}.
\url{https://www.sullcrom.com/siteFiles/Publications/SC_Publication_Bank_Levies_in_the_UK_France_and_Germany.pdf}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-TaxJustice2019}{}%
Tax Justice. 2019. ``Unitary tax.''
\url{https://www.taxjustice.net/unitary-tax/}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-EqualityTrust2014}{}%
The Equality Trust. 2014. ``Income Inequality and Participation.''
\emph{The Equality Trust Research Update} 4.
\url{https://www.equalitytrust.org.uk/sites/default/files/research-update-income-inequality-and-participation.pdf}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-EqualityTrust2017}{}%
---------. 2017. ``Trust, Participation, Attitudes and Happiness.''
\url{https://www.equalitytrust.org.uk/trust-participation-attitudes-and-happiness}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-TheTrussellTrust2019}{}%
The Trussell Trust. 2019. ``End of Year Stats - Food Bank Use.''
\url{https://www.trusselltrust.org/news-and-blog/latest-stats/end-year-stats/}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-tiesdell1996}{}%
Tiesdell, Steven. 1996. \emph{Revitalizing Historic Urban Quarters,
Hartnolls Ltd}. Boston: Architectural Press.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Tily2016}{}%
Tily, Geoff. 2016.
\url{http://touchstoneblog.org.uk/2016/07/uk-real-wages-decline-10-severe-oecd-equal-greece/}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Torry2016}{}%
Torry, Malcolm. 2016. ``The Feasibility of Citizen's Income.'' Palgrave
Macmillan, 286.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-TransportforLondon2004}{}%
Transport for London. 2004. ``Jubilee line raises land value by
estimated £2.8billion at Canary Wharf and Southwark Tube stations -
Transport for London.''
\url{https://tfl.gov.uk/info-for/media/press-releases/2004/july/jubilee-line-raises-land-value-by-estimated-andpound28billion-at-canary-wharf-and-southwark-tube-stations}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-TreanorFarrell2014}{}%
Treanor, Jill, and Sean Farrell. 2014. ``UK only G7 country with wider
inequality than at turn of century.''
\url{https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/oct/14/uk-inequality-wealth-credit-suisse}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-TUC2017}{}%
TUC. 2017. \emph{The impact of increased self employment and insecure
work on the public finances.}

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-UKParliament2015}{}%
UK Parliament. 2015. ``Reforms for corporation tax:'' UK Parliament.
\url{https://www.parliament.uk/business/publications/research/key-issues-parliament-2015/economy-public-finances/corporation-tax/}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-UnitedNations1992}{}%
United Nations. 1992. ``Report of The United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development.''
\url{http://www.un.org/documents/ga/conf151/aconf15126-1annex1.htm}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-VanKamp2003}{}%
Van Kamp, Irene, Kees Leidelmeijer, Gooitske Marsman, and Augustinus De
Hollander. 2003. ``Urban environmental quality and human well-being
Towards a conceptual framework and demarcation of concepts; a literature
study.'' \emph{Landscape and Urban Planning} 65:5--18.
\url{https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/12e6/693ec007d7c9856af6bcc8012d397e9b843b.pdf}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Vestager2016}{}%
Vestager, Margrethe. 2016. ``Speech: Competition for a Fairer Society.''
\url{https://ec.europa.eu/commission/commissioners/2014-2019/vestager/announcements/competition-fairer-society_en}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-DeVries2011}{}%
Vries, Robert de, Samuel Gosling, and Jeff Potter. 2011. ``Income
inequality and personality: Are less equal U.S. states less agreeable?''
\emph{Social Science \& Medicine} 72 (12). Pergamon:1978--85.
\url{https://doi.org/10.1016/J.SOCSCIMED.2011.03.046}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-GranthamResearchInstituteonclimatechangeandtheenvironment2014}{}%
Ward, Bob, and Naomi Hicks. 2014. ``What is the polluter pays principle?
-.''
\url{http://www.lse.ac.uk/GranthamInstitute/faqs/what-is-the-polluter-pays-principle/}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Webber2016}{}%
Webber, Dominic, and S Chris. 2016. ``Household satellite accounts :
2005 to 2014.''
\href{file:///C:/Users/sacha_000/Downloads/Household\%20satellite\%20accounts\%202005\%20to\%202014.pdf}{file:///C:/Users/sacha\_000/Downloads/Household satellite accounts 2005 to 2014.pdf}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Wells}{}%
Wells, Claudia, and Nathan Thomas. n.d. ``Household disposable income
and inequality: financial year ending 2015.''
\url{https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/personalandhouseholdfinances/incomeandwealth/bulletins/householddisposableincomeandinequality/financialyearending2015\#redistribution-of-income-through-cash-benefits-and-direct-taxes}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Wightman2013}{}%
Wightman, Andy. 2013. ``A Land Value Tax for England.''
\url{http://www.andywightman.com/docs/LVT_england_final.pdf}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Wilkinson2010}{}%
Wilkinson, Richard G., and Kate. Pickett. 2010. \emph{The Spirit Level :
why equality is better for everyone}. Penguin Books.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Wilkinson2017}{}%
Wilkinson, Richard, and Kate Pickett. 2017. ``The Science Is In: Greater
Equality Makes Societies Healthier and Richer - Evonomics.''
\url{https://evonomics.com/wilkinson-pickett-income-inequality-fix-economy/}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-PatrickWintour2010}{}%
Wintour, Patrick, Randeep Ramesh Patrick Wintour, and Hélène Mulholland.
2010. ``Iain Duncan Smith: it's a sin that people fail to take up
work.''
\url{https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/nov/11/welfare-iain-duncan-smith}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-Wolf2010}{}%
Wolf, Martin. 2010. ``Why were resources expunged from neo-classical
economics?''
\url{https://www.ft.com/content/e8a23b18-3118-39a9-95cc-ef28c0f1e8e6}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-YouGov2015}{}%
YouGov, and Will Dahlgreen. 2015.
\url{https://yougov.co.uk/news/2015/08/12/british-jobs-meaningless/}.



\end{document}
