# Scope

Are you looking for a new economic model for your country? This book is addressed to economists, scientists, politicians, businesspeople, other professionals, and interested members of the general public.

This book is concerned with how to pay for public services and social protection in a world characterised by 'wicked externalities', 'generalised rent', and international flows of money and assets. Wicked externalities, such as climate change, are damages caused by our actions that affect others remote in time and space, without effective governance systems to constrain them. Generalised rent is a permanent financial surplus received by the owners of properties in valuable locations and the shareholders of large companies. We argue that generalised rent leads to expensive housing, stagnating wages and wealth gains for the already rich. International tax avoidance leads to multinational companies and rich individuals failing to pay their fair share for society's upkeep. 

We are interested in an economy that is fit for our children. This means that we need the *private sector* to have the right incentives. So there are two, distinct, systems that are in scope of our book. The first is the entire private sector. If the private sector does not have the right incentives, it will not produce the right outcomes. The second system is more technocratic: the taxation system itself. And how can we actually change these systems?

The central concern of the book is the use of the tax system for public benefit: to solve the critical challenges facing our societies including climate change, poverty and the complexity, avoidance and evasion in our taxation and welfare systems. The book proposes a simple and effective tax and social security system to solve these problems and to enhance genuine wealth at the level of the individual, community, nation state and planet.

We are interested in two other systems in particular that overlap with the tax system: the financial and monetary system and the social security (welfare) system. Our focus is the UK tax and welfare system, but the ideas are intended to be applicable to most societies around the world. Out of scope is the detail of the benefits system and the detailed technicalities of how some taxes work. We focus on the big picture rather than accounting of taxes, although we do cover some implementation choices.