# Historical Case Studies

We wish not just to minimise the costs of taxation, but rather to aim for taxes, where possible, that are actively beneficial. Good taxes would shape the profit motive towards the needs of people, communities, and the living planet on which we all depend. Here, we seek a tax and social security system that is not only fair and practical but also beneficial to everyday people, our country and our world. Our argument would be more concrete if we could point to situations around the world where this might happen.

Welfare and Work -- Beveridge and the UK in the late 1940s

As we discuss in chapter 3, the Beveridge report shows a possible way forward for welfare. Before the second world war, the five social evils of Want, Squalor, Idleness, Disease and Ignorance ravaged the poor in Britain. The second world war destroyed many buildings, homes and businesses alike, and increased the government and external debt. But yet, the post war government managed to create a comprehensive welfare state where none existed before: a health service. It also managed its debt.

Finance: Financial 'Repression' in the UK in the period 1945--1980

One great anxiety is about *debt*. There are basically two forms of debt that concern people: public (or government) debt and private debt. High public debt pressures governments to 'cut the deficit' through 'austerity'. Yet in the past, the best way to reduce the burden of public debt has been not to worry about it: or rather to use different strategies. In the three decades after the second world war, the UK reduced its public debt to GDP ratio from over 250% of GDP to 70% of GDP. It did this not through austerity, but rather through growth, inflation, monetisation of some debt, and low interest rates. We consider the fiscal benefits of such strategies later in this book.

Income and Corporation Tax: USA in the period 1945--1980

The United States in the post war showed the advantage of redistributive income taxation, including high tax rates on companies. The top rate of income tax was often over 70% in that period, and taxes on companies were also higher than at present. Because everyone's incomes were not widely different, this meant that normal people could not only afford consumer goods but also everyone had a chance to buy the limited positional goods such as land. Since the top rate of tax was high, and since income tax is the largest and most important tax, this meant that the average tax rate paid by people on average earnings was lower. We discuss this is parts 6 and 7.

Land Value Capture: Singapore and Hong Kong since independence

Singapore shows what has been termed the 'property state' [@Haila2015]: it shows what is possible when there is a 'prosperity loop' between investment in public infrastructure and public rent collection. In short, as the government makes infrastructure improvements, those increase the rental value of the land, and those land value increases then accrue to the government. Hong Kong also shows the advantages of this approach: before a new metro line is built, land near the new stations is purchased at pre-announcement cost and so society captures the land value benefit of the new infrastructure [Purves]. We discuss this is part 8.

**Environmental Taxes: Scandinavia, Switzerland and the UK **

Three European countries show that a carbon tax can work exactly as planned. Sweden, Switzerland and the UK all have a carbon tax. Sweden was one of the first to introduce its carbon tax and the per capita $CO_2$ emissions of Sweden are now amongst the lowest in Europe. Similarly, Switzerland has also introduced such a tax. The UK introduced its carbon price floor more recently, and it has seen a large fall in emissions. Most notably, we have seen a drop in the use of coal in electricity generation. Other environmental taxes include charges for plastic bags.

## **Four-Fold Way**

We suggest four forms of entrepreneurship. Firstly, public good entrepreneurship: we suggest that the private sector be turned over to public good provision. The obvious example is green entrepreneurship, but we also suggest ways that companies can tackle other global issues such as the lack of good antibiotics. The second issue is state capitalism entrepreneurship. This involves both the state and capitalists. The third is municipal land value entrepreneurship, as has been seen in Singapore and Hong Kong. The fourth is skill based personal and social entrepreneurship.

There's a fifth overarching concept too, which we term policy entrepreneurship. That is, we should break out of the monopoly of thought imposed on us by neoclassical economics and neoliberal economic ideas. These forms of entrepreneurship imply a new growth model for everyone, one that is not based on increasing financialisation and debt issued on limited assets but rather the development of productive industries solving our collective problems.

## **Proposals**

We will set out how, on a consumption basis, *taxing* the environmental damage that people cause is sensible, that we should tax unproductive and unearned wealth, and finally, we should tax luxury consumption using the income tax system to ensure it is progressive.

We also have some reforms for the benefits and training system. We suggest a dividend for everyone, a cheque in the post -- and to integrate the tax and benefits system, replacing means testing with taxation (since it achieves the same thing, taking money away from people as they earn more). We also suggest an active benefits system for training people in high skills. We suggest the accumulation of wealth across the poor, rather than the government having the responsibility to support them. Then, when people pay their tax, some of that tax would be set aside as a contribution that will fund the purchase of assets, a return to a contributory tax system.

Finally, we suggest changes to the financial system. Allied to our tax on wealth is a tax on lending on unproductive wealth. Thus, we encourage investment across the economy. We use the financial system to actively promote the capture of land rent for public purposes. We suggest particularly low-cost loans for the building a new cost infrastructure, in this country and around the world. Finance is particularly international and lending can ensure that everyone gets enough energy.

## **Four Crucial Benefits of Good Taxes**

There are four crucial benefits of a better taxation system to wider society:

1. *A clean and safe global environment:* The first priority is the environment. We start with the most important part of the tax system, the system of environmental taxation. There are a number of major environmental problems facing us, most notably climate change and ocean acidification, but also including the prevalence of plastics in the ocean, habitat destruction, road congestion, overfishing, rare resource consumption and conventional air, water and land pollution. Using environmental taxes faces a few challenges: they can be unpopular, hard to design, encourage 'offshoring' of dirty forms of manufacture and bureaucratic. Finally, because sometimes demand for damaging products can be unresponsive to price, a high environmental tax may be necessary. But high environmental taxes may be unpopular, disruptive or unrealistic. Also, individual country actions are not enough. Instead, we need action that is global. But there are no functioning global institutions. Thus, we look for solutions that can be implemented at a national level, which *and* which encourage other countries to follow the lead. Such solutions should be within international laws and rules as well. We show how those potential issues can be overcome.

Because it is so important, we do not intend to raise additional revenue with this taxation source, but we do intend to ensure that the private sector has the correct incentives. To accomplish that, we start with a higher carbon tax on electricity production. Electricity production should have an incentive to be carbon neutral. We achieve this with a tax on carbon inputs with a subsidy on electricity production. Simultaneously, we also provide low-cost loans from the public loan board. There will be prizes for rapid rollout of new technologies and national targets for the roll out of low-carbon electricity. We have a CARBON TAX.

1. *A prosperous and wealthy country:* The second priority is a prosperous and wealthy country. The current taxation system does not encourage productive wealth formation. In fact, it encourages those sorts of companies that *extract* wealth from the country and discourages those who wish to invest in the society. A better system would encourage people who invest in *real assets*, but discourage purely financial investment. In short, a good tax system encourages a balance of trade. It discourages foreign investment in a financial sense whilst encouraging investment in a real sense. An optimal taxation system would involve a collaboration between state and the private sector, so the gains of research and development investment are shared between both. And an optimal social security system would involve some funding from sovereign wealth funds, including personal accounts, so that the people and state accumulate assets to support them in hard times.

For this, we need to provide an incentive for companies like Dyson to locate into the UK. We suggest the following: a *higher* corporate tax but calculated as follows: Sales -- UK Wages -- UK Investment. In other words, the tax should *encourage* UK companies to invest in the UK. We call this a DYSON TAX. The financial system should be encouraged to lend to real businesses.

1. *An affordable home in a prosperous community*. The third priority is an affordable home for all. British governments have massively mismanaged the taxation of housing and business properties. By appropriately taxing the value of the location (land), in a way that is convenient and fair for all, we make it possible for most people to enjoy the economic benefits of owning their own home. An optimal tax system would encourage community action, so that 'community entrepreneurship' allows communities to develop their value and capture the fruits of this development. How do we achieve this, given how expensive homes already are in South East England?

Well, the first thing is to capture location rent increases for public causes. What does this mean? This means that the property taxes: council taxes, business rates and stamp duty should be rolled up into a single tax. This should be a tax on property with the *value* of tangible investment deductible. So that means a house is a value, so you shouldn't be charged on this. The residual should be allocated between the local community, the municipal authority and the central government. Taxing property values rather than property per se would stabilise the current property values. We have a LAND VALUE TAX payable in cash or deferred until sale or death.

1. *Secure incomes, productive jobs and economic power:* The current social security system is highly insecure: benefits are taken away from people when their conditions change, leading them often to go into arrears with their rent or other payments, and often leading them into debt. The current social security system also discourages work, as benefits are withdrawn as income increases (in the Universal Credit system at a rate of 61% for every £ increase in income). A better system in which benefit would not be withdrawn so rapidly as income increases, would encourage people to increase their skill level, would be well integrated with the taxation system and would also support those who enhance their communities in ways other than simply earning money (for example, by caring or raising a child). It would also allow division of labour with minimal taxation between individuals in communities (so eliminating the tax advantages of being a company relative to an everyday citizen).

The fourth priority is secure incomes, productive jobs and economic power. For this, we need to simplify the existing income and means-tested benefit system. Rather than the current system of means testing benefits, there would be a single system of basic income and taxation. A 'simplifying' basic income payable to everyone in society would be combined with a simplification of the system of income taxation, so that a standard rate of 40% is applied to all income up to the point when someone reaches the top 1% of incomes. Furthermore, there would be citizen wealth funds, and assets would be granted to individuals based on how much tax they paid. There would be a 'target minimum level' of wealth and individual's tax would build up this minimum level of wealth. We have a SIMPLIFIED INCOME TAX, BASIC INCOME and WEALTH FUND.

## **Appendix: Singapore as a 'Property State'**

Singapore is often described as a neoliberal paradise: low taxes, open trade, a large financial sector. It has been phenomenally successful, with average growth rates in the range of 5-10% and has transformed itself into a city state with amongst the highest GDP in the world.

Scratch the surface and a rather different story arises, one that has public ownership of land and provision of public housing at its heart, as described by Anne Haila's ['Urban Land Rent, Singapore as a Property State'](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/book/10.1002/9781118827611). So what exactly is the 'Singapore model' in relation to property?

Ownership of land has really two components: it allows the landlord to collect rent on whoever is occupying the property, and it gives control over the development of that land, including usually the effects of that development on the physical environment, on other people and landowners and on the supply of housing. Singapore has both components: public capture of rent, and public development of housing.

The first component, capturing land rent for public purposes, is shared by those arguing for a land value tax (LVT). Proponents of an LVT argue for taxing land value (principally urban land, as agricultural land is of much lower value). An LVT separates the value of a property into two components: the value of the physical building (the bricks and mortar) and that of the underlying location (land value). Almost all the major economists, from Adam Smith, David Ricardo, to Milton Friedman and Britain's Mirrlees Review of taxation have argued in favour of an LVT and American journalist Henry George popularised these ideas with his masterpiece *Progress and Poverty*. Recently the Economist [has promoted the idea](https://www.economist.com/briefing/2018/08/09/the-time-may-be-right-for-land-value-taxes). The ownership of land allows the charging of ground rent, but this idea is implemented sensitively with a view to reducing the cost of housing to low-paid workers.

Singapore has also shown the advantages of the second component: the public sector having a decisive role in developing land. Providing public housing is of course crucial in a rapidly-developing high wage city with limited space. Furthermore, the state development of infrastructure increases those very same land values. The return of a profit to the public sector, thus leads to the replenishment of the funds which can be used to provide further investment, in a beneficial cycle. Contrast this to Britain where public infrastructure such as HS2 is paid from public funds whereas the landowners near the stations, who benefit thanks to increased land values, pay nothing. 

The whole tenor of the Singapore approach is pragmatic, putting the public interest first, being sensitive to the interests of individuals, and avoiding concentration of power in any one institution.

Whilst the institutions of the Singapore property state model have evolved over decades, there are policy solutions that could give the benefits of land value tax and of public ownership of land more directly. In the UK, an LVT would replace council tax, business rates and stamp duty. It would be a proportional tax on the value of property paid by owners rather than occupiers, with a deduction for the value of the bricks and mortar. And future *increases* in land rent could be taxed at nearly 100% and the revenues shared between those responsible: the local community, municipal authority and national government. Those with large mortgages would be protected by asking banks to pay the land value tax on the proportion covered by a mortgage. Alternatives to bank mortgages such as building societies and state-backed community land purchase could also be developed.

Singapore shows that public land ownership can be combined with high rates of owner occupation. Low cost and high-quality public housing can be both affordable and beneficial to all parts of the community, including the business sector. In Brexit Britain, where parts of the public sector, such as Railtrack, are still selling off land to the private sector, where public housing provision has declined relative to the private sector, and where property taxation is outdated and arbitrary, the Singapore property state model deserves a closer look.
